 BARRON'S BOOK NOTES (tm) on CD-ROM  Windows (tm) Ver. 4.2
Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings        Tolkien, J. R. R.      
---------------------------------------------------------
   Electronically Enhanced Text (C) Copyright 1993, World Library, Inc.     
                                                                            
CONTENTS                                                                    
                               CONTENTS                                     
                        SECTION............................ SEARCH ON       
                                                                            
      THE AUTHOR AND HIS TIMES............................. TLORAUTH        
                                                                            
      THE NOVELS                                                            
      The Plot                                                              
          The Hobbit....................................... THOBPLOT        
          The Lord of the Rings............................ TLORPLOT        
      The Characters                                                        
          The Hobbit....................................... THOBCHAR        
          The Lord of the Rings............................ TLORCHAR        
      Other Elements                                                        
           Setting......................................... TLORSETT        
           Themes.......................................... TLORTHEM        
           Style........................................... TLORSTYL        
           Point of View................................... TLORVIEW        
           Form and Structure.............................. TLORFORM        
      THE STORIES.......................................... TLOREXPL        
          The Hobbit....................................... THOBSTOR        
          The Lord of the Rings............................ TLORSTOR        
                                                                            
      A STEP BEYOND                                                         
      Tests and Answers.................................... TLORTEST        
      Term Paper Ideas and other Topics for Writing........ TLORTERM        
      Chronology of Middle-earth........................... TLORCHRO        
      The Critics.......................................... TLORCRIT        
                                                                            
      Advisory Board....................................... TLORADVB        
                                                                            
      Bibliography......................................... TLORBIBL        
                                                                            
AUTHOR_AND_HIS_TIMES                                                        
                       THE AUTHOR AND HIS TIMES             (TLORAUTH)      
-                                                                           
  When you were younger, did you ever make up stories about the people      
and places around your home? Maybe there was an abandoned house that        
in your imagination became haunted by ghosts, or an old neighbor woman      
that you envisioned as a witch. This fantasizing isn't very                 
different from what many writers do when they transform their               
experiences into fiction. J. R. R. Tolkien, in his invention of             
Middle-earth, has done this to a greater degree than most. The              
Hobbit and, even more so, The Lord of the Rings were the fruits of a        
lifetime's work, and Tolkien incorporated into them the landscape of        
his childhood, his interest in philology (the study of languages), his      
religious faith, his own vivid imagination, and his attitudes toward        
the world and the events happening around him.                              
  The first three years of Tolkien's life were spent in South               
Africa, where he had been born in 1892. His mother returned to England      
in 1895 with him and his younger brother. His father stayed in South        
Africa, planning to join the family later, but within a few months          
he contracted rheumatic fever and died.                                     
  The Tolkiens settled in the small English town of Sarehole, where         
the widow struggled to raise her children alone. As he grew, Tolkien        
showed an aptitude for language, and under his mother's tutelage            
studied Latin and French. An avid reader, he especially loved fairy         
tales. His favorite was the story of Sigurd, the dragon slayer. It          
wasn't the hero but the dragon Fafnir who intrigued him. The dragon         
represented a world that was exciting and dangerous, yet that was           
safely removed from his own life. Tolkien later recalled, "...the           
world that contained even the imagination of Fafnir was richer and          
more beautiful, at whatever the cost or peril." His fascination with        
dragons was later to appear in the character Smaug in The Hobbit.           
  Despite their poverty, it was a happy time for the boys, and in           
later years Tolkien recalled the countryside and its people with great      
fondness. In fact, the land and the people of Sarehole were to              
become part of his books, as the Shire and its whimsical                    
inhabitants, the hobbits. You can see elements of his childhood home        
in hobbit country. The Sarehole mill became an important landmark near      
Bag End, Bilbo's home, and the miller's evil-looking son was                
transformed into Ted Sandyman, the unscrupulous hobbit who contributes      
to the polluting of the Shire in The Lord of the Rings. "The Shire,"        
Tolkien once said, "is very like the kind of world in which I first         
became aware of things." At another time, he said, "I took the idea of      
the hobbits from the village people and the children."                      
  Tolkien became absorbed in the study of language. After his teachers      
introduced him to Anglo-Saxon, or Old English, he began to read heroic      
tales such as Beowulf and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Next he          
turned to Old Norse and the Norse sagas. On his own, he rummaged            
through the local bookstore for books on philology and archaic              
languages. Then he began to invent his own languages and alphabets. He      
developed complex histories for his languages, earlier words that           
evolved into later words, just as the Old English "stan" evolved            
into "stone" in modern English.                                             
  Not surprisingly, Tolkien went to Oxford University to study              
philology. One day he discovered a Finnish grammar book. While the          
words themselves enthralled him, Tolkien's imagination was also             
fired by the tales written in this strange language. He delved into         
Finnish mythology and found himself wishing that there was such a body      
of work for England. It was perhaps at this point he first thought          
of writing a mythology himself.                                             
  Now Tolkien began work on a new language, based on Finnish- his "mad      
hobby," as he called it. He felt that the language needed a history to      
support it: a language can't exist without the people who speak it.         
Tolkien decided that this language was spoken by a race of elves who        
had already appeared in the poetry he was writing. This poetry was          
to form the basis of the vast mythology Tolkien wrote about a land          
called Middle-earth. just as his languages were based on actual             
languages, his mythology incorporated elements of the myths and             
legends that Tolkien admired.                                               
  Around this time, World War I began, and England declared war on          
Germany. Tolkien entered the British army as an officer. Before             
going off to war, he married his childhood sweetheart, Edith Bratt.         
Like Tolkien, whose mother died when he was 12, Edith was an orphan.        
They had fallen in love when he was 16 and she was 19. Their                
guardians, however, had found out about the romance and had                 
forbidden the lovers to meet until Tolkien turned 21, when he would         
legally be an adult. He incorporated this long separation into The          
Lord of the Rings, in the romance between Aragorn and Arwen.                
  Tolkien was sent to France, where he took part in the 1916 Battle of      
the Somme, a costly battle for the Allied forces. The slaughter             
there of thousands of young British soldiers left a lasting impression      
on Tolkien. In addition, the land had been desolated by trench warfare      
and the use of heavy artillery. His description of the desolation           
around Mordor has often been cited for its resemblance to the war-torn      
landscapes in Europe. Many of his colleagues who had been through           
the war saw its influence on Tolkien in scenes where he describes           
not only the horror of war, but also the sense of close comradeship         
and the quiet joys of little things. Those who survived the Battle          
of the Somme faced death from an unexpected quarter in the following        
months. Influenza and trench fever swept the ranks, affecting soldiers      
and officers alike. Tolkien contracted a particularly bad case of           
trench fever and was shipped back to England in late 1916. He spent         
his long recovery working on his mythology. The war ended in late           
1918. Tolkien had survived, only to find that all but one of his close      
friends had died. To someone who valued friendship so highly, this was      
a great blow.                                                               
  Tolkien once said that at the heart of his books is the                   
realization of the inevitability of death. At the age of 24, he had         
already faced not only the widespread death of the war, but also the        
personal losses of his parents and friends.                                 
  Tolkien slowly returned to academic life. He moved through a              
series of university positions, culminating in his election to a            
professorship at Oxford. He published several scholarly works that won      
respect in his field, including a landmark lecture on Beowulf, the          
famous Old English epic poem.                                               
  But he began to feel increasingly alienated from the world about          
him. Postwar England was rapidly changing with the growth of                
technology and industry. The way of life he loved so much and had           
risked his life to defend in war was disappearing. He watched sadly as      
trees were cut down and countryside was taken over by city, all in the      
name of progress.                                                           
  Tolkien's answer was to turn to the myths and heroic legends of           
the past. He also continued to work on his own mythology. By this           
time, he had developed several new languages and a complex history and      
mythology, for the races who spoke them. This hobby, as Tolkien             
modestly called it, was his consuming passion, but he never expected        
it to arouse much interest in others. He wrote several poems and            
stories that were published in a university weekly, but there was           
nothing yet to catch the popular imagination.                               
  That was to change with his invention of hobbits- short, jolly            
folk with hairy feet and a love of tobacco pipes. One day while             
sitting at his desk and grading papers, Tolkien came upon a blank           
page. He wrote on it, "In a hole in the ground there lived a                
hobbit." Almost ten years after he had written that first line,             
Tolkien completed The Hobbit, the story of a timid hobbit named             
Bilbo Baggins, who sets out on an adventure with a troop of dwarves         
and a wizard. Tolkien incorporated into his book elements from his          
mythology, including the dwarves and elves. His childhood memories and      
the inventive imagination that so delighted his own children gave           
the book its droll humor and its main character, Bilbo. In the hobbit,      
Tolkien had found a character his readers could identify with and           
follow into the heroic world of myth and legends.                           
  The Hobbit was published in 1937 as a children's book. It was met         
with great enthusiasm and received several awards, including the            
prestigious New York Herald Tribune prize as the year's best                
children's book. At the request of his publishers, Tolkien set out          
to write a sequel to The Hobbit. The publishers had wanted another          
children's book, but it soon became apparent that the new book was          
taking on a more profound meaning and would far surpass The Hobbit          
in depth as well as length. When Tolkien at last submitted his new          
novel, The Lord of the Rings, his publisher thought that it was a work      
of genius but that it would probably be a commercial flop. However,         
when the first book of the trilogy, The Fellowship of the Ring, was         
published in 1954, it had respectable sales that quickly increased          
to a phenomenal rate. The other books of the trilogy, The Two Towers        
and The Return of the King, were published sooner than planned because      
of the popular demand.                                                      
  The critics offered a range of comment on Tolkien. Some gave him          
great reviews, and he was awarded a prize for the best fantasy novel        
of 1956. Others sharpened their pencils and attacked the trilogy            
mercilessly. They said it was badly written, and dismissed it as            
escapist fantasy. According to these critics, Tolkien's popularity          
would quickly fade. But such negative prophecies proved wrong.              
Tolkien's books soon developed a wide following, especially on college      
campuses in the United States. In the 1960s, Tolkien's message of love      
and peace and respect for nature appealed to students looking for           
new meaning in their lives. Clubs were formed and fan magazines were        
published for the sole purpose of discussing his books.                     
  Tolkien, meanwhile, had retired from teaching in 1958. He                 
published several more small works of fiction. But most of his              
effort went into his mythology, which he still had hopes of                 
publishing. The task was a huge one. Tolkien had an assortment of           
manuscripts to work with, some dating back to his college days.             
Through the years, he had written conflicting versions of some stories      
from his mythology and had left others unfinished. The inconsistencies      
had to be ironed out and the gaps filled in. Facts also had to be           
corrected where they disagreed with The Hobbit and The Lord of the          
Rings. This work remained unfinished at his death in 1973.                  
  The job of finishing the book was taken on by his son Christopher,        
who edited the manuscripts and compiled a coherent history of               
Middle-earth, from its creation through to the events recounted in The      
Lord of the Rings. In 1977 this history was published as The                
Silmarillion. If you read it, you will find the book very different         
from Tolkien's novels. It contains a great deal of legends and              
tales, some more fully outlined than others, but none with the plot         
and character development typical of a story. (In this way, The             
Silmarillion is even more like the ancient epics than Tolkien's             
other books.) If you want to know more about Middle-earth, however,         
the book contains a wealth of information about the land and races          
created by Tolkien's fertile imagination.                                   
                                                                            
THE_PLOTS                                                                   
                              THE NOVELS                                    
-                                                                           
                              THE PLOTS                                     
-                                                                           
                              THE HOBBIT                    (THOBPLOT)      
-                                                                           
  Bilbo Baggins is a hobbit, one of a race of short, timid creatures        
who live in cozy tunnels and who prefer to keep their lives ordered         
and predictable. One day, he unexpectedly finds himself playing host        
to Gandalf the wizard and thirteen dwarves. The dwarves, with               
Gandalf's help, plan to travel to the Lonely Mountain to recover the        
treasure that a dragon named Smaug stole from their people long ago.        
Gandalf has selected Bilbo to be their burglar. The dwarves aren't too      
happy with the wizard's choice, especially when Bilbo faints at the         
first talk of danger. But Gandalf insists there is more to the              
little hobbit than meets the eye.                                           
  Bilbo himself isn't sure that he's happy about being chosen burglar.      
But a part of him does yearn for adventure, and so one spring               
morning he finds himself setting out for Lonely Mountain with               
Gandalf and the thirteen dwarves. He doesn't prove very helpful at          
first. But then something happens that changes Bilbo's life. He             
finds a magic ring that makes him invisible, and has several                
opportunities to use it to rescue the dwarves from danger and               
imprisonment. They become quite impressed by him, and even rely on          
him, just as Gandalf foretold.                                              
  Bilbo and the dwarves finally reach Lonely Mountain, the home of          
Smaug the dragon. The dwarves send Bilbo down a secret passage to           
the dragon's lair. Bilbo has more confidence in himself now and not         
only steals a cup, but manages to hold his own in a conversation            
with the wily Smaug- not an easy thing to do.                               
  Furious that someone has dared steal a piece of his treasure,             
Smaug attacks the mountainside where the dwarves have their camp. Then      
he flies toward Lake-town, to punish the inhabitants for helping the        
dwarves.                                                                    
  The people of Lake-town run at the sight of Smaug, but one man,           
Bard, holds his ground. He kills the dragon with his last arrow and         
escapes before Smaug falls, smashing the town. Believing the dwarves        
are dead, an army of men, led by Bard, and an army of elves march           
toward the Lonely Mountain to divide the treasure. They find to             
their surprise that the dwarves are still alive.                            
  Bard, because he killed the dragon, claims his rightful share of the      
treasure. When the dwarves refuse to surrender it, the army besieges        
the mountain. Bilbo tries to end the dispute by stealing the                
Arkenstone, the piece of treasure most valued by the leader of the          
dwarves. He gives the jewel to Bard, hoping it can be used to force         
the dwarves to negotiate. Bilbo's bravery wins him praise from all but      
the dwarves, who are furious with him. When more dwarves arrive from        
the north, they are determined to fight.                                    
  Just as war begins to break out, an army of goblins and wild              
wolves attack. The dwarves, elves, and men forget their differences         
and join together to keep from being killed. Help comes in the nick of      
time, and the goblins are defeated.                                         
  Bilbo finds that he's a hero, honored by men and elves and even           
given a share of the treasure. But he's had enough of adventure and         
sets off for home with Gandalf. Once there, he finds that his house         
and furnishings are being auctioned off, since everyone believed him        
dead. Finally, everything is straightened out and he's able to              
settle down again into his old, comfortable life. Although from then        
on, he's considered eccentric by his neighbors, he continues his            
friendship with elves and dwarves and the wizard, happily recounting        
his tales to any who will listen.                                           
-                                                                           
                        THE LORD OF THE RINGS               (TLORPLOT)      
-                                                                           
  Long after the events in The Hobbit, Bilbo again leaves the Shire,        
but not before reluctantly passing on his magic ring to his heir,           
Frodo Baggins.                                                              
  Many years later, Frodo learns from Gandalf, the wizard, that his         
ring is the Ring, which belonged to the evil ruler Sauron. Sauron           
was thought to have been destroyed ages ago. But now he has reappeared      
in his ancient stronghold of Mordor. His Ring was presumed lost, but        
Sauron has discovered that it's presently in the hands of a hobbit          
named Baggins, who lives in the Shire.                                      
  To protect the inhabitants of the Shire from Sauron's wrath, Frodo        
decides to take the Ring and leave Bag End for Rivendell with three         
friends- Merry, Pippin, and Sam. Gandalf was supposed to accompany          
them, but no word has been heard from him. On the way, the four             
hobbits are closely pursued by menacing Black Riders, servants of           
Sauron. The hobbits are unprepared for the dangers that face them, and      
several times they're almost killed because of their foolishness.           
Fortunately, they are joined by a strange, secretive man called             
Strider, who offers to lead them to Rivendell.                              
  One night, Frodo is wounded in an attack by the Black Riders. His         
friends bring him to Rivendell, where he is cured by Elrond, the            
leader of the Half-elven (a race of people who are half elf and half        
human).                                                                     
  A council meets in Rivendell to decide what to do about the Ring.         
It's agreed the Ring must be destroyed, for the temptation to use it        
is too strong, and anyone who does use it will be corrupted by its          
power. Frodo takes on the task of bringing the Ring to Mordor and           
casting it into the volcano where it was forged.                            
  Strider takes this opportunity to reveal his true name: Aragorn.          
He is rightful heir to the throne of Gondor, which has been ruled by        
stewards for many years in the absence of a king. He plans to return        
to Gondor, to aid in its fight against Sauron and to claim his crown.       
  When Frodo departs from Rivendell, he is accompanied by                   
representatives of all the free races of Middle-earth: Gandalf the          
wizard, Legolas the elf, Gimli the dwarf, Aragorn and Boromir of the        
race of men, and Frodo's hobbit friends, Sam, Merry, and Pippin. While      
passing through the mines of Moria, the company is threatened by a          
Balrog, a terrifying creature of flame and shadow. While fighting           
the Balrog, Gandalf and the creature plunge into a deep abyss and           
are both thought killed.                                                    
  The rest of the company splits up further south. Boromir has              
fallen under the influence of the Ring and tries to take it from            
Frodo. Frodo runs away and decides to travel on to Mordor alone, but        
his faithful servant, Sam, insists on going with him.                       
  Meanwhile, the others are attacked by orcs, an evil race created          
by Sauron. (Goblins and orcs are the same thing- Tolkien changed the        
name in The Lord of the Rings.) Merry and Pippin are captured, and          
Boromir dies defending the hobbits. After giving Boromir a hero's           
funeral, Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli follow the trail of the orcs,          
hoping to rescue their friends. Instead, they find Gandalf, who has         
survived his fight with the Balrog and has emerged with renewed power.      
Gandalf tells the others that Merry and Pippin are safe: they               
escaped the orcs and are now with the Ents of Fangorn Forest. The           
Ents, who are shepherds of the trees, have been roused by the hobbits'      
story to attack Saruman, an evil wizard in league with Sauron.              
  Gandalf, Legolas, Aragorn, and Gimli enlist the men of Rohan,             
whose country is threatened by Saruman's growing power, to join the         
fight against the wizard. With the help of the Ents, Saruman is             
overthrown.                                                                 
  Frodo and Sam, meanwhile, begin their long journey toward Mordor.         
They are followed by Gollum, the miserable creature who owned the Ring      
before Bilbo found it. Frodo and Sam capture him and make him               
promise to help them. Gollum guides them to a secret passage into           
Mordor. But in doing so, he also treacherously leads them into a trap.      
The secret passage he takes them through is the lair of a giant spider      
named Shelob, who he hopes will kill them so he can recover the Ring.       
  Shelob attacks Frodo, paralyzing him with her sting. Thinking that        
Frodo is dead, Sam charges the spider and succeeds in driving her off.      
Then he takes the Ring, intending to carry on the quest. Before he can      
leave, however, some orcs find Frodo's body and carry it into their         
fortress. Sam overhears them say that Frodo isn't dead, but only            
poisoned. Then the gates of the tower close behind the orcs, and Sam        
finds himself locked out.                                                   
  Meanwhile, the others fight desperately to save Minas Tirith, the         
capital of Gondor, from Sauron's army. Against great odds, they win.        
Aragorn proves his claim to kingship by his great healing power: it is      
said that the hands of a king are the hands of a healer. But he             
doesn't yet claim the throne. First he leads what remains of the            
army to the gates of Mordor. Against Sauron's might they seem               
pitifully weak. Their only hope is to distract Sauron while Frodo           
and Sam travel through Mordor and destroy the Ring. If Frodo succeeds,      
Sauron will fall. If Frodo fails, they will all die or be enslaved.         
  Inside Mordor, Sam has managed to rescue Frodo from Sauron's orcs.        
The two hobbits creep through the desolate landscape of Mordor.             
Frodo grows so weak from resisting the power of the Ring that he can        
barely crawl, and Sam carries him for a while. When they at last reach      
the Crack of Doom where the Ring is to be destroyed, Frodo's will           
snaps, and he claims the Ring as his own. But Gollum appears and            
fights him for the Ring, biting it off Frodo's hand. Still gloating,        
Gollum falls into the flames and is destroyed along with the Ring.          
With the Ring destroyed, Sauron is vanquished forever. Frodo and Sam        
are rescued from the ruins of Mordor by eagles, and together with           
Aragorn's army, they return to Minas Tirith in triumph.                     
  There is much feasting and rejoicing as Aragorn is declared king and      
marries Arwen, the daughter of Elrond. The hobbits have all become          
heroes. But now they are ready to go home, and they head for the            
Shire. When they get back, however, they find that things have              
changed. Saruman has gained control, along with his ruffians, and is        
bullying the hobbits and destroying the beautiful countryside of the        
Shire. But Frodo, Sam, Merry, and Pippin have learned much from             
their adventures and quickly set things right.                              
  All seems well, until Frodo falls sick. He has been wounded too many      
times- by the Black Rider's knife, by the Ring, and by Gollum. It is        
ironical that even though he saved the Shire, he cannot enjoy it            
anymore. One autumn day he sets sail with Bilbo and Gandalf across the      
sea to the Blessed Realm, where he may at last find peace.                  
                                                                            
THE_CHARACTERS                                                              
                            THE CHARACTERS                                  
-                                                                           
  The following are major characters in The Hobbit and in The Lord          
of the Rings.                                                               
-                                                                           
                              THE HOBBIT                    (THOBCHAR)      
-                                                                           
  BILBO BAGGINS                                                             
  Bilbo is the small, timid hero of The Hobbit. It has been pointed         
out by some readers that in his thoughts and actions he is                  
representative of modern man. Thus, adults are able to identify with        
him and not feel so out of place in Tolkien's heroic world of               
wizards and dwarves. Bilbo is also, fittingly, a character that             
children can readily identify with, since The Hobbit was written as         
a children's story and today is considered by many to be a classic          
in that genre.                                                              
  Bilbo can also be seen as an example of Everyman, reflecting the          
potential greatness in us all. He's just an ordinary person. And            
with his small stature and simple, timid nature, he's certainly an          
unlikely hero.                                                              
  Yet, despite his apparent weaknesses, Bilbo finds the strength to         
become heroic. His strength seems to come from the things he holds          
dear- frequent meals, a peaceful ordered life, and his pipe- the            
very things that, to some, make him seem so ordinary and laughable.         
And at the end of the book, these things are still important to Bilbo,      
a sign that these are qualities Tolkien wanted to emphasize. The            
only way Bilbo has changed is that he has become more                       
self-confident, more capable of taking care of himself and of others.       
  But is Bilbo really an example of Everyman? In some ways he's not         
your average hobbit. For one thing, he's a bachelor, and a wealthy one      
at that. For another, his mother was from the Took family, hobbits          
with a tendency to be more daring and adventurous than most. This           
leads some readers to say that Bilbo is a member of an elite group,         
a select few who are superior to the common people. You'll have to          
decide for yourself what Tolkien intended- whether Bilbo represents         
the potential for greatness in even the weakest individual, or whether      
Bilbo is part of an elite circle that most people can never reach.          
-                                                                           
  GANDALF                                                                   
  Gandalf is the wizard who assists Bilbo and the dwarves on their          
journey. Like a typical wizard, Gandalf appears as an old man               
dressed in blue robes and a tall pointed hat. Wizards are skilled in        
magic, and Gandalf's specialty is fire. In the beginning of The             
Hobbit, Bilbo enthusiastically recalls Gandalf's marvelous                  
fireworks. Later in the story, Gandalf puts his skills to more              
practical use- for example, when he throws the evil wargs into an           
uproar with a magical fire that clings to their fur.                        
  Wizards are often known for their shrewdness as well as for their         
magic, and Gandalf is no exception. He defeats the trolls not by magic      
but by cleverly distracting them until the sun rises and turns them to      
stone.                                                                      
  Despite his wisdom and magical powers, however, Gandalf can also          
be seen as a humorous figure. When Gandalf first meets Bilbo,               
Tolkien describes him in comic terms as having long, bushy eyebrows         
that stick out beyond his hat. He can be childish at times, acting          
grumpy in a rainstorm, or vexed that Elrond is the first to find the        
secret letters on Thorin's map.                                             
  Bilbo remembers from his childhood the wizard's fabulous                  
fireworks, wonderful gadgets, and thrilling stories of adventure. just      
as Fafnir the dragon excited the imagination of the young Tolkien,          
so Gandalf intrigues Bilbo with a dangerous world, far removed from         
the hobbit's comfortable life. As the story of The Hobbit begins,           
Gandalf reenters Bilbo's life and starts the hobbit on an adventure         
into that dangerous world.                                                  
-                                                                           
  THORIN OAKENSHIELD                                                        
  Thorin is the self-important leader of the dwarves and the                
grandson of Thrain, the last king under Lonely Mountain. The most           
completely developed character of the thirteen dwarves, he shows            
both the weaknesses and the strengths of his race. Accordingly,             
readers may find him ambiguous. He can be petty, selfish, and pompous,      
but he can also be heroic and awe-inspiring. He's motivated at first        
by greed and the desire for revenge, but when he reaches Lonely             
Mountain he begins to feel a higher purpose, claiming his rightful          
title as king under the mountain. He succumbs to a weakness of his          
race- possessiveness- but later redeems himself through courage in          
battle.                                                                     
-                                                                           
  GOLLUM                                                                    
  Gollum was once a hobbitlike creature, but when Bilbo meets him he        
has degenerated both morally and physically. Gollum has become a            
"small, slimy creature" with long webby feet, who lives in the heart        
of the mountain, paddling his boat on a subterranean lake. His most         
prized possession is his ring, which can make him invisible. He's           
obsessed with this ring, calling it by the name he uses for himself:        
"my precious."                                                              
  Gollum's moral degeneration can be seen in his deceitful actions          
toward Bilbo. Yet Tolkien also depicts Gollum as a lonely, pitiable         
creature, who weeps at the loss of his one precious possession.             
-                                                                           
  BARD                                                                      
  When Bard first appears in the story, he is just an anonymous             
inhabitant of Lake-town. He proves his worth when he arouses the            
town to face the dragon Smaug's attack, and succeeds in killing             
Smaug when everyone else has given up the fight.                            
  Bard is a heroic figure, a grim leader of strength and discipline,        
who serves as a contrast to Bilbo, the timid hobbit. Yet they both          
become heroes because of their determination to do what must be             
done, regardless of the consequences. Ironically, Bard's name is an         
old word for a certain type of poet who in England and Ireland's            
past often composed tales of heroism. When you read the book, try to        
decide whether this is a joke on Tolkien's part or whether in some          
ways Bard is more like a poet than a warrior.                               
-                                                                           
  SMAUG                                                                     
  Dragons are often depicted in legends as jealously guarding a             
great treasure. Tolkien stays true to this tradition in his                 
portrayal of Smaug, who long ago drove the dwarves from their home          
in the Lonely Mountain and now jealously broods over treasure stolen        
from them and others. Dragons also have a reputation as wily                
talkers, and Smaug ranks with the best of them. He never says what          
he means, and even his polite words carry veiled menace. He skillfully      
plays on Bilbo's doubts and seeks to trick him into giving himself          
away.                                                                       
  Folklore describes dragons as misers who have been transformed by         
their greed. Dragons have also long been a symbol for the lure of gold      
and the evil that wealth brings. Tolkien uses this association between      
dragons and greed. He even refers to the corrupting effect of the           
treasure as "dragon-sickness."                                              
-                                                                           
  THE MASTER                                                                
  The Master, the greedy and scheming leader of Lake-town, seems in         
some ways a human counterpart to the dragon Smaug. He, too, is a            
wily talker, carefully choosing his words to manipulate others. He          
succumbs to the dragon-sickness- greed- and steals the share of the         
treasure that was to go to Lake-town.                                       
  The Master contrasts with Bard, who always says exactly what he           
thinks, even if others don't want to hear it. Also unlike Bard, the         
Master turns his back on his town, thinking only to save his own skin.      
In his selfishness he proves himself to be a poor leader.                   
-                                                                           
                        THE LORD OF THE RINGS               (TLORCHAR)      
-                                                                           
  FRODO BAGGINS                                                             
  The hero of The Lord of the Rings trilogy, Frodo is Bilbo's young         
cousin. He inherits Bilbo's home and his magic ring when Bilbo              
leaves the Shire. Frodo's adventure begins when he learns that the          
ring is actually a thing of great evil. It is the Ring, made by             
Sauron, the Dark Lord, who is now trying to regain it. Frodo sets           
off on what will become a long and dangerous quest to destroy the           
Ring.                                                                       
  Readers often compare the characters of Bilbo and Frodo. Like Bilbo,      
Frodo is a bachelor and has some eccentric blood; his mother was a          
Brandybuck, a family of adventurous hobbits like the Tooks. Also            
like Bilbo, he starts out as a somewhat foolish hobbit and through his      
travels matures into a heroic figure.                                       
  But there are important differences between the two hobbits. Frodo        
is not the comic character that Bilbo was. He has benefited from            
Bilbo's knowledge, learning the lore and language of the elves and          
thereby earning their respect. His quest is more selfless than              
Bilbo's. He doesn't seek to win a treasure, but hopes to destroy one        
(the Ring of Sauron) for the good of all Middle-earth. Unlike Bilbo,        
Frodo can't use the Ring to help him with his task. And, finally,           
his story is in the end tragic- while he saves Middle-earth from            
destruction, he can no longer enjoy its beauties. He suffers too            
greatly from his wounds and from the loss of the Ring. His departure        
for the Blessed Realm at the end of the book is interpreted by some         
readers to be a symbolic death and also bears some similarity to the        
departure of the legendary King Arthur to Avalon, a magical island.         
  Frodo is sometimes considered a Christ-figure, because he                 
undergoes great suffering for the sake of others (Tolkien himself           
would not say if this is what he intended. He wanted readers to make        
their own interpretation.) While he becomes weaker physically               
through the course of his trials, he also becomes stronger                  
spiritually. A certain light seems to shine within Frodo,                   
reminiscent of the description of saints. When Frodo leaves                 
Middle-earth in the company of Gandalf, Galadriel, and other beings of      
great power, this increases the sense that Frodo has become                 
something more than human.                                                  
-                                                                           
  ARAGORN (STRIDER, THE DUNADAN, ELESSAR THE ELF-STONE)                     
  As Strider, chief of the Rangers who secretly guard the Shire,            
Aragorn guides Frodo and his friends to the safety of Rivendell. There      
Aragorn reveals that he's the descendant of kings. Through the rest of      
the book, Aragorn must prove himself worthy of the throne of Gondor.        
  Some readers feel that Aragorn should be considered as a second hero      
of The Lord of the Rings who is equally as important as Frodo. As           
you read, note the contrasts and parallels between the two characters.      
Aragorn's quest is to regain his inheritance, the throne of Gondor,         
whereas Frodo's quest is to destroy his inheritance (the Ring given         
him by Bilbo). Aragorn is a man of heroic stature and his tasks are         
those of war and leadership, whereas Frodo's are more spiritual: he         
must resist the temptation of the Ring.                                     
  Like Frodo, Aragorn continues to grow in character through the            
course of the book. In the beginning, he's shown as a loner,                
unaccustomed to friendship. At first glance he even seems                   
disreputable, and the hobbits are suspicious of him. In Rivendell,          
he reveals that as rightful heir to the throne of Gondor, he plans          
to go there to present his claim. But when the loss of Gandalf              
forces him to take over leadership of the group of hobbits, he can          
no longer think only of his personal interests.                             
  Aragorn is a very private man, yet Tolkien reveals glimpses of            
strong emotions: resentment at the simple folk who scorn him, not           
knowing that he protects them from great danger; loneliness at              
living the life of an outcast; and deep love for Arwen, Elrond's            
daughter.                                                                   
  The romance between Arwen and Aragorn is only hinted at in the book,      
and their marriage at the end of the story may come as a surprise to        
you. In an appendix of The Lord of the Rings, you will find the full        
story of their romance.                                                     
-                                                                           
  SAM GAMGEE (SAMWISE)                                                      
  Sam Gamgee, the son of Frodo's gardener, sets out with Frodo on           
the quest to destroy the Ring. He proves himself a faithful servant.        
  Tolkien once said that Sam was modeled on the noncommissioned             
soldiers he served with in World War I. Tolkien had found the common        
soldiers much more likable than his fellow commissioned officers.           
Years later he said, "My 'Sam Gamgee' is indeed a reflection of the         
English soldier, of the privates and batmen [soldiers who perform           
various services for superior officers] I knew in the 1914 war, and         
recognized as so far superior to myself."                                   
  Because he's just a gardener's son, Sam serves as the best example        
of Tolkien's theme about the greatness in common people. Sam at             
times seems simpleminded and shows a lack of understanding of the true      
seriousness of a situation. But his name, Samwise, hints that he's not      
so foolish as he seems. Sometimes he can be very perceptive in              
determining the motives of others. His greatest virtue is loyalty.          
Because of his devotion to Frodo, he too becomes a hero. It is Sam who      
rescues Frodo from the orcs and helps Frodo in his painful journey          
through Mordor, even carrying him when Frodo is too weak to crawl.          
  Some readers view Sam as a negative stereotype of a member of the         
working class. They object to what they see as his simplemindedness         
and his doglike devotion to Frodo. They feel that Sam should be an          
equal to Frodo. What do you think of the relationship between Sam           
and Frodo? Is it possible or desirable in the world today?                  
-                                                                           
  GOLLUM (SMEAGOL)                                                          
  Gollum, the miserable creature who owned the Ring before Bilbo,           
reappears in The Lord of the Rings. He reveals the location of the          
Ring to Sauron, who sends the Black Riders to the Shire after Frodo.        
Much later in the trilogy, Gollum guides Frodo into Mordor and betrays      
him by leading him into the lair of Shelob the spider. Even so,             
neither Frodo nor Sam can bring himself to kill Gollum. Their mercy is      
rewarded, for Gollum brings about his own destruction as well as the        
destruction of the Ring.                                                    
  Many people think of Gollum as Frodo's doppelganger, or alter ego. A      
doppelganger is a character who is strongly connected to the main           
character, and who seems to represent a hidden facet, often the darker      
side, of the main character's personality. While doppelgangers are          
used as a literary device, they also appear often in folklore.              
Gollum's connection to Frodo is through the Ring. They have both            
possessed the Ring, though Gollum uses it selfishly for evil purposes,      
while Frodo unwillingly accepts it in order to destroy it. Frodo,           
unlike the other characters, can understand Gollum's obsession with         
the Ring and the misery it has caused him, for Gollum represents            
what may happen to Frodo if he succumbs to the Ring's power. In Frodo,      
Gollum sees what he might have been, had it not been for the Ring.          
Gollum's grief at the loss of the Ring foreshadows Frodo's own pain         
and unhappiness after the Ring is gone. In the end, like most               
doppelgangers, Gollum is finally destroyed, representing the                
destruction of the evil that Frodo has had to struggle with in              
himself.                                                                    
  Some people see Gollum as a tragic figure. He has not been                
completely corrupted by the Ring. A part of him remembers his old           
life, and by implication, he can then still remember and comprehend         
good, something that characters such as Sauron, who are totally             
evil, cannot. Because part of his old self remains, he's tormented. He      
both hates the Ring and craves it desperately. The conflict between         
his two sides is revealed as he alternates between his original             
hobbitlike personality (Smeagol), speaking normally and eager to            
please, and his Gollum side, nasty and treacherous. But Gollum seems        
doomed from the beginning, for his destiny, as has been hinted              
throughout the trilogy, is to be destroyed with the Ring.                   
  Do you sympathize with Gollum? Why or why not? Do you think he            
deserves his fate?                                                          
-                                                                           
  GANDALF (MITHRANDIR, THE GREY PILGRIM, THE WHITE RIDER)                   
  Gandalf the Grey is one of three wizards who appear in The Lord of        
the Rings. The other two are Saruman the White and Radagast the Brown.      
Gandalf seems to be a more dignified character in The Lord of the           
Rings than he was in The Hobbit. In Rivendell he is revealed as an          
imposing figure of great power that he uses for unselfish purposes. He      
says that he's a steward over all living things, and he works to            
protect them from evil.                                                     
  Whereas Saruman is tempted to use his power to further his own ends,      
Gandalf is content to help others in their struggles against evil,          
placing himself in the service of all who need him. This is viewed          
by some readers as a Christian image and they interpret Gandalf as          
being saintlike. (It should be pointed out that such selflessness is        
considered a virtue by many religions, and also by many nonreligious        
people. It need not be interpreted as a Christian idea.) Like Frodo,        
Gandalf sacrifices himself for the sake of others, apparently dying in      
his fight with the Balrog, and later being resurrected. Tolkien once        
said that Gandalf is an angel. But it is not clear if he meant it           
literally, or meant only that Gandalf was similar to an angel, someone      
with great power who is sent as a guardian.                                 
  Some people argue that Gandalf is the true hero of the book. He           
has been opposing Sauron for ages, whereas others such as Frodo and         
Aragorn appear only near the end of the long battle against evil.           
Throughout the story, Gandalf works behind the scenes, guiding the          
others and making it possible for them to fulfill their roles in the        
struggle. When the ring is destroyed, Gandalf's long guardianship of        
Middle-earth is at last over. With Frodo, he passes over the sea to         
the Blessed Realm.                                                          
  Gandalf can be compared to Merlin the magician, who appears in            
Arthurian legend. Like Gandalf, Merlin doesn't use his powers to            
further his own ends, but instead acts for the good of England,             
which is threatened with internal conflict and with conquest by             
foreigners. He acts as a councilor, sometimes using his magic to            
help things along, but never using it in any outright attempt to force      
events to follow his will. Gandalf's relationship with Aragorn is           
comparable to Merlin's relationship with Arthur, whom Merlin helps          
to win the throne of England and establish a lasting peace.                 
-                                                                           
  SAURON                                                                    
  Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor, is the personification of evil in        
The Lord of the Rings. He is also referred to as the Necromancer in         
The Hobbit. Tolkien's only physical description of him is as a lidless      
red eye. This serves to heighten the sense of dread surrounding him,        
more than any other description could. Through Sauron, Tolkien              
offers his own ideas about evil: that nothing started out evil, that        
evil cannot create but can only pervert, that evil cannot comprehend        
good and so cannot predict the actions of good, and that evil destroys      
free will. Through the power of the Ring, Sauron intends to enslave         
the inhabitants of Middle-earth.                                            
-                                                                           
  SARUMAN (SHARKEY)                                                         
  Saruman the White is a wizard like Gandalf and is head of the             
White Council that originally drove Sauron (the Necromancer) from           
Mirkwood Forest. But Saruman has studied the ways of the enemy and has      
fallen into the temptation to be like him, to rule the world as he          
sees fit. When he speaks to Gandalf of the need to drop weaker allies,      
and when he defends murder if it's committed for greater good, he           
may remind you of some modern political speakers who believe that           
anything can be justified by an appeal to some nebulous greater             
good. That, coupled with his destructive technology, makes him a            
very modern villain, a little more recognizable than Sauron.                
Saruman, like all of Tolkien's totally evil characters, cannot              
understand good and hates those who are good. For example, he               
doesn't understand Frodo's mercy toward him near the end of the             
trilogy, and he hates Frodo for it.                                         
  Some readers see Saruman as Gandalf's alter ego, in much the same         
way that Gollum is Frodo's alter ego. Saruman had the potential to          
be what Gandalf is, a wise and powerful being. Likewise, Gandalf has        
the potential to become like Saruman, for he has the same abilities         
and is faced with the same temptations as his fallen counterpart.           
-                                                                           
  MERRY AND PIPPIN (MERIADOC BRANDYBUCK AND PEREGRINE TOOK)                 
  These two hobbits, friends of Frodo, serve as a balance to Frodo and      
Sam. Even more so than Sam and Frodo, they are foolish, innocent,           
and unprepared for the trials ahead. Where Sam and Frodo face mainly        
mental trials, Merry and Pippin endure the physical trials of war.          
It is through their eyes that you see most of the action in Rohan           
and Gondor. And they both come face to face with evil, when Pippin          
is questioned by Sauron through the palantir, the stone of seeing, and      
when Merry meets the leader of the Black Riders in battle. They emerge      
from their trials stronger and wiser, and able to defend their own          
home. As an outward sign of this internal change, they have also grown      
taller.                                                                     
-                                                                           
  BOROMIR AND FARAMIR                                                       
  Boromir and Faramir are both sons of Denethor, the steward of             
Gondor. You first meet Boromir in Book II, where he joins the               
company who set out from Rivendell with Frodo. Faramir doesn't              
appear until Book IV, when Frodo and Sam meet him in Ithilien, just         
outside the borders of Mordor. Faramir is the leader of a band of           
men from Gondor who are engaged in guerrilla warfare, harassing             
Sauron's armies.                                                            
  Boromir and Faramir serve to contrast the warrior with the spiritual      
man. Boromir is characterized by his brother as closer to the "middle"      
race of men, the warriors. He is a proud man, who loves fighting,           
glory, and power. He falls under the temptation of the Ring, for he         
believes that force can be used in the fight for good. Faramir, on the      
other hand, is of the "high" race, which is more noble than the middle      
race in Tolkien's scheme of things. A lover of knowledge, he hates war      
and fights only to  protect the land he loves. He easily resists the        
temptation of the Ring, for he recognizes the danger of power over          
others.                                                                     
-                                                                           
  THEODEN AND DENETHOR                                                      
  Theoden, king of Rohan, is a warrior of the middle race of men,           
while Denethor, steward of Gondor, is of the high race, a lover of          
knowledge. Yet in this case the comparison between "middle" and "high"      
is reversed, with the warrior appearing in the more favorable light.        
Theoden believes in the heroic ethic of the Anglo-Saxon epics: "Will        
shall be the sterner, heart the bolder, spirit the greater as our           
strength lessens." No matter how the battle goes, he never gives            
into despair, and eventually dies, fighting to the end. Denethor, on        
the other hand, prides himself as a man of knowledge. When his              
knowledge leads him to believe the fight is hopeless, he can't              
accept defeat and, giving in to despair, commits suicide.                   
Ironically, his suicide indirectly causes Theoden's death.                  
-                                                                           
  EOWYN                                                                     
  The niece of Theoden, Eowyn is the most fully developed female            
character in Tolkien's works. She feels caged, first at having to take      
care of her ailing uncle, then at being left behind when the army           
rides into battle. She desires glory, not just dull duty. She falls in      
love with Aragorn, and when he doesn't return her love, she seeks           
death in battle. Calling herself Dernhelm, she disguises herself as         
a young warrior and becomes a hero by killing the leader of the             
ringwraiths. Eowyn is finally cured of her death wish when she falls        
in love with Faramir. Instead of earning glory in battle, she now           
wants to be a healer.                                                       
-                                                                           
  THE RINGWRAITHS (BLACK RIDERS, NAZGUL, THE NINE, FELL RIDERS)             
  Their captain is called the Black Captain, the Dark Captain, the          
Morgul king, and the Witch-lord of Angmar. The ringwraiths were nine        
men who served Sauron and fell under the power of the rings he had          
made for the race of men. Now they have faded into a shadow world           
and are invisible. Their cry drives men to despair. Some readers say        
that the ringwraiths couldn't cause such despair unless they                
themselves felt it.                                                         
-                                                                           
  TOM BOMBADIL                                                              
  Tom Bombadil was named after a doll that belonged to Tolkien's            
daughter. Frodo and his friends meet him when he comes to their rescue      
in the Old Forest. His appearance is humorous: he is a short old man        
with yellow boots and a blue coat, and when the hobbits first see           
him he is hopping and dancing down the path, carrying lilies and            
singing nonsense songs.                                                     
  But Tom proves to be a very powerful being. Even the Ring has no          
effect on him; in fact, he's able to make the Ring vanish. His wife,        
Goldberry, says that Tom is the Eldest, and master over all. With           
his great power, he could serve as a strong ally against Sauron. But        
when Gandalf speaks about him later, he says that Tom is not                
involved in this battle. The Ring means nothing to Tom, and if they         
asked him to guard it he would probably forget about it and lose it.        
  Tom is one of Tolkien's characters who are closely associated with        
the natural world. In fact, many readers think of Tom Bombadil as a         
personification of nature. His lack of involvement in the war               
against Sauron is seen as a sign of nature's neutrality in the war          
between good and evil.                                                      
-                                                                           
  TREEBEARD (FANGORN)                                                       
  Treebeard the Ent is another character who is closely associated          
with nature. There's a story that Tolkien invented the Ents for one of      
his sons, who was distressed to see so many trees cut down in the name      
of progress, and wanted to see the trees get revenge. Treebeard             
leads the Ents, a race of treelike creatures, against Saruman, whose        
orcs have been wantonly cutting down trees.                                 
  Like Tom Bombadil, Treebeard is neutral in the war against Sauron.        
He tells Merry and Pippin that the only reason the Ents attack Saruman      
is that he has been destroying the forest.                                  
                                                                            
SETTING                                                                     
                            OTHER ELEMENTS                                  
-                                                                           
                               SETTING                      (TLORSETT)      
-                                                                           
  The events in The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings take place in the      
imaginary world of Middle-earth, which is inhabited by fantastic            
people and animals, such as elves, wizards, and dragons, who are            
rather human in many ways. Some people say that since the works are         
set in a world that could never exist, they have no relevance to our        
own. However, many authors have used invented settings to make telling      
points about the real world. Some well-known examples are Gulliver's        
Travels by Jonathan Swift and Animal Farm by George Orwell.                 
Furthermore, according to Tolkien, Middle-earth is nothing more than        
our own world in the remote past. The name Middle-earth itself is           
actually an archaic word for the earth. Although wizards, elves, and        
dragons may no longer exist, the principles ruling Middle-earth are         
still in effect today.                                                      
  Tolkien tries to draw you into his fictional world by creating the        
impression that Middle-earth is a real place. He describes in detail        
the landscape, filling it with the familiar plants and animals of           
Earth. The books, on one level, are a tour through Middle-earth. You        
learn the names and background of different landmarks. You also meet        
the inhabitants of Middle-earth and learn something about their             
customs and histories. You'll probably enjoy these details, even            
though most are not essential to the plot. But all this information         
can also be confusing. In the index at the end of The Lord of the           
Rings you will find the names of people, places, and things. At the         
beginning of each volume you will find maps to help you follow the          
action through Middle-earth. Also, a brief history of Middle-earth          
is given in the end of this guide.                                          
  The setting forms a very important part of the story. Places such as      
the Shire, Rivendell, and Lorien are different forms of utopias,            
presenting some of Tolkien's thoughts about the ideal society- for          
example, that humans should live in harmony with nature. Evil is often      
associated with particular locations, such as Sauron's stronghold in        
Mordor. It is also associated with mountains and barren landscapes;         
compare the Desolation of Smaug, for example, with the wastelands           
around Mordor.                                                              
  Encounters with danger in Tolkien's books often occur in mountains        
or in a forest. A character's passage into an underground place or          
into a dense forest can be interpreted as a descent into the                
person's subconscious. In other words, the danger that the character        
faces is symbolic of an internal struggle. So, for example, when Bilbo      
meets Gollum in the underground lake, he's actually meeting a part          
of his subconscious. In other words, the episode with Gollum may be         
interpreted as Bilbo confronting the potential for evil within              
himself. Tolkien disliked such interpretations, however, and                
insisted that his books be taken at face value.                             
                                                                            
THEMES                                                                      
                                THEMES                      (TLORTHEM)      
-                                                                           
  The following are themes of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings.         
-                                                                           
  1. STRUGGLE BETWEEN GOOD AND EVIL                                         
  The forces of good in Middle-earth are engaged in a continuing            
struggle against evil. What will be the final outcome of this               
struggle? Some readers think Tolkien indicates evil will prevail,           
while others say he's optimistic about the ultimate victory of good.        
  Those feeling Tolkien thinks evil will win out note that it's left        
to seemingly powerless individuals like Frodo to face the overwhelming      
force of evil. These individuals must struggle on with no hope for          
assistance from someone more powerful, and with little hope for             
victory or even survival. Victory, when it is achieved, comes only          
at great cost to the forces of good. And it seems to win only a             
breathing space, barely enough time to recover before evil again            
arises and threatens the freedom of Middle-earth.                           
  Other readers see a strong vein of optimism in Tolkien's works. They      
point to the fact that the inhabitants of Middle-earth are helped in        
their fight by a benevolent power. The workings of that power are           
seldom visible to the individuals in the midst of the action, but a         
larger viewpoint reveals a grand design. Even evil deeds are turned to      
good purpose- for example, when Merry and Pippin's capture by the orcs      
serves to bring them to Fangorn in time to rouse the Ents against           
the evil wizard Saruman. This seems to imply that good is stronger and      
more lasting than evil.                                                     
  Keep these two viewpoints in mind as you read the book. Look for          
evidence to support one or the other, and decide which you think            
better explains Tolkien's works.                                            
-                                                                           
  2. DETERMINISM VS. FREE WILL                                              
  The question of determinism is only hinted at in the last chapter of      
The Hobbit, when Gandalf suggests to Bilbo that his adventures may          
have been managed for some higher purpose. But in The Lord of the           
Rings it is repeatedly emphasized that seemingly random events are          
part of some grand design. Each of Tolkien's characters there has a         
big or small part to play in that design. The actions of evil               
characters are turned to good, against their will. The main weapon          
of evil- despair- is used to turn people from their assigned tasks and      
so foil the designs of good. These elements in the works make people        
seem like puppets manipulated by opposing powers of good and evil.          
  Tolkien, however, also notes the importance of free will. His             
characters are free to accept or reject possible courses of action.         
The forces of good in The Lord of the Rings, such as Gandalf and            
Galadriel, respect this freedom to choose. They continually tell            
others that they not only can but must make their own decisions. Not        
even the prospect of total defeat can justify interfering with the          
free will of others. The forces of evil, on the other hand, seek to         
destroy free will.                                                          
    It may be argued that, according to Tolkien, free will is only          
an illusion. Many times characters make important decisions without         
knowing why they made them. Bilbo, for example, is never sure just how      
he ended up leaving his comfortable home to join the dwarves on             
their adventure. Do you think that such decisions are truly free, or        
are Tolkien's characters being manipulated without their knowledge?         
Keep this question in mind as you read the works.                           
-                                                                           
  3. NATURE OR HEROISM                                                      
  It is in their darkest moments that Tolkien's characters seem to          
rise above themselves and become truly heroic. Their heroism does           
not come from great strength or cunning, but from the indomitable will      
to continue as long as there is a means to resist. This is a kind of        
heroism that even the physically weak can achieve, as shown by              
Tolkien's hobbits.                                                          
-                                                                           
  4. RESPONSIBLE USE OF POWER                                               
  In Middle-earth, power is a dangerous thing that can turn against         
those who wield it. The forces of good in Middle-earth, such as Elrond      
and Gandalf, recognize this danger and are very careful how they use        
their power. They know that no matter how good their intention, they        
will find their purpose perverted if they resort to force. The best         
example of this is their refusal to use the Ring. The Ring gives the        
power to dominate others, and with it they could overthrow Sauron. But      
the Ring also dominates the will of whoever wears it. Even if               
Gandalf used the Ring only out of the worthy desire to help others,         
he'd fall under its influence and turn into another Dark Lord like          
Sauron.                                                                     
  Although the forces of good will not use the power to dominate            
others, they do have other powers available to them- the power to           
heal, the power to understand, and the power to create beauty. But          
these seem pitifully small in the face of Sauron's power, and the           
temptation to "fight fire with fire" is strong.                             
-                                                                           
  5. COMMON PEOPLE VS. THE ELITE                                            
  Tolkien believed in the power of common people. This can be seen          
most clearly in the hobbits. They are weak and often foolish, yet           
capable of great acts of heroism that amaze even the very wise and the      
very strong.                                                                
  The opposite point of view, elitism, is also apparent in Tolkien's        
works. His heroes seem to be a select few, chosen for the task of           
saving the world from evil. The ordinary people, such as the men of         
Lake-town and the hobbits of the Shire, are often depicted as simple        
and complacent. Some people see elitism as a bad thing. Others              
don't: People aren't all equal, they say, and it is the responsibility      
of the strong to help the weak. Which view do you favor? Why?               
-                                                                           
  6. IMPORTANCE OF FRIENDSHIP                                               
  It is not lofty principles but love for land and friends that             
gives Tolkien's characters the strength to make the right choices in        
the difficult decisions they face. The evil characters, who lack            
this capacity for friendship, hurt their own efforts by fighting among      
themselves. Tolkien goes further to show that friendship should not be      
given just within a closed circle but should be extended to all             
people.                                                                     
-                                                                           
  7. EVILS OF POSSESSIVENESS                                                
  In The Hobbit the evils of possessiveness can be easily seen. The         
dwarves are corrupted by their desire for treasure, and their greed         
almost leads to war with men and elves. But possessiveness can also be      
the root of the desire to dominate others that leads to the evil in         
The Lord of the Rings. Do you know what it's like to have another           
person feel possessive toward you? Such people can't seem to allow you      
your own identity- your own free will- and are unhappy if you aren't        
exactly what they want you to be. Now imagine if someone felt that way      
about the world, wanting to make everything go his way and having           
the power to accomplish this. He'd hate anything that had a will of         
its own and would want to dominate it. He might try to enslave all          
mankind. If he wasn't able to force nature to his will, he might            
even attempt to destroy it. This is exactly what Sauron tries to do in      
Middle-earth; he reduces countryside to wasteland, enslaves others          
through the lesser Rings of power, and attempts to rule all of              
Middle-earth.                                                               
-                                                                           
  8. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MAN AND NATURE                                    
  Nature plays an important role in Tolkien's works. Through                
characters like Tom Bombadil and the Ents, Tolkien seems to be              
saying that nature is an entity separate from ourselves, something          
to be respected, not dominated. His good characters have a great            
respect and love for nature, while the evil ones destroy nature.            
Furthermore, those who live close to nature, such as the hobbits and        
the elves of Lorien, seem to draw great power for good from it.             
-                                                                           
  9. EVILS OF TECHNOLOGY                                                    
  This is related to the previous theme, for Tolkien saw technology as      
something that destroys nature. Middle-earth is for the most part a         
pretechnological world. The only technology that exists is                  
introduced by the forces of evil and is used in destructive ways. To        
Tolkien, technology represents the evils of the modern world:               
ugliness, depersonalization, and the separation of man from nature.         
                                                                            
STYLE                                                                       
                                STYLE                       (TLORSTYL)      
-                                                                           
  Tolkien uses a variety of styles in his works. The Hobbit is              
mostly written in relatively simple, friendly language: "With that the      
hobbit turned and scuttled inside his round green door, and shut it as      
quickly as he dared, not to seem rude." Tolkien's use of this kind          
of style makes sense when you realize that the book was originally          
published as a children's book.                                             
  The Lord of the Rings, which had been begun as a sequel to The            
Hobbit, starts out in similar style. But Tolkien soon realized that it      
would be a book of much wider scope than The Hobbit, and, accordingly,      
not far into the story he introduces a more serious tone. Sometimes he      
uses simple, conversational speech: "When Frodo came to himself he was      
still clutching the Ring desperately." At other times he uses a very        
formal style, reminiscent of the language of both ancient epics and         
the Bible: "And there came Gandalf on foot and with him one cloaked in      
grey; and they met before the doors of the Houses of Healing."              
  You will find many songs or poems scattered throughout Tolkien's          
books. You may be tempted to skip over these songs, but take a look at      
them anyway. They serve important purposes. They help characterize the      
people singing them. They also add humor or set the mood in some            
scenes. In addition, Tolkien's characters at times use songs in the         
ancient tradition of telling tales through song, as the minstrels of        
medieval Europe did. Keep in mind that Tolkien did not try to write         
polished poetry. Instead, he tried to make his songs sound like             
something that his characters would make up themselves.                     
  As a scholar of language, Tolkien has a good ear for the ways             
different people talk. His characters and their different races have        
distinctive styles of speech that reveal a lot about their                  
personalities. Look at this exchange, for example, between Bilbo and        
one of the dwarves in The Hobbit:                                           
-                                                                           
  "Good-bye and good luck, wherever you fare!" said Balin at last. "If      
ever you visit us again, when our halls are made fair once more,            
then the feast shall indeed be splendid!"                                   
  "If ever you are passing my way," said Bilbo, "don't wait to              
knock! Tea is at four, but any of you are welcome at any time!"             
-                                                                           
  As you can see, the main characteristic of Tolkien's style is to use      
language in a variety of ways. He even invented languages for his           
different races, such as the elves and the dwarves. You may find it         
interesting to choose a scene that you especially like and read it          
closely, noting the various ways that Tolkien uses words.                   
  Tolkien also used other techniques of style, such as                      
personification, metaphor, and imagery. These are discussed at various      
points in The Story section of this guide.                                  
                                                                            
VIEW                                                                        
                            POINT OF VIEW                   (TLORVIEW)      
-                                                                           
  Tolkien's works are written in the third person and sound as              
though they are stories being told aloud. In The Hobbit, the                
narrator speaks as if he's telling a story to children, often               
interrupting himself to make little asides. He also creates a very          
clear moral framework for the story, telling you from the onset             
whether a character is good or bad or somewhere in between. This is         
appropriate for children, who usually want to be able to easily             
differentiate good and evil characters. In The Lord of the Rings,           
which is intended for adults, Tolkien no longer does this. Instead          
he remains for the most part outside the story, leaving it up to the        
characters to judge each other.                                             
  The narrator usually follows the story through the eyes of one of         
the hobbits. This serves two purposes. First, the hobbit is                 
generally considered to be a representative of the modern world, a          
comfortably familiar character you can identify with in a book              
filled with such magical images as wizards and elves. Second,               
following the story from the hobbits' point of view makes the               
hobbits the heroes of the book, placing an emphasis on their traits         
and their way of looking at the world. In this way, Tolkien shows           
the importance of ordinary people and reveals what it is that he            
believes makes them so special.                                             
  While the narrator of these books generally follows the story from        
the point of view of a character, he's not limited by that character's      
knowledge. He's able to step out of the story and offer information         
and insights that the characters are not aware of. In this way he's         
able to show you the total picture, which can reveal a clear pattern        
and purpose behind seemingly random events, while at the same time          
he shows how these events appear to the individuals involved.               
                                                                            
FORM                                                                        
                          FORM AND STRUCTURE                (TLORFORM)      
-                                                                           
  The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings are similar in structure.            
Both are organized around the idea of a journey into the unknown and        
back again, making the stories circular in form. Each journey can be        
roughly divided into four parts: a period of initiation, the                
fulfillment of a quest, a battle or battles, and the return home.           
  In the first part, the inexperienced hero of the story sets out on a      
journey with a group of companions. The story progresses from one safe      
haven to another, with dangerous episodes in between. In The Hobbit,        
for example, Bilbo and the dwarves set out from Bilbo's comfortable         
home into the Wilds. After facing the trolls, they arrive in                
Rivendell, where they replenish their supplies. They are attacked by        
goblins while crossing the Misty Mountains, and at last reach the           
safety of Beorn's home. From there they pass through the dangers of         
Mirkwood and arrive in Lake-town. Frodo and his friends have a similar      
series of adventures in The Fellowship of the Ring, the first part          
of The Lord of the Rings.                                                   
  These adventures serve as a period of initiation: through them,           
Bilbo and Frodo are prepared for the tasks that still await them.           
These entertaining episodes also give Tolkien an opportunity to             
present characters and themes.                                              
  The safe havens serve a similar function, introducing themes and          
characters. In contrast to the action of the other scenes, they             
provide a "tableaux," a graphic representation of a place or                
culture. This is especially true of The Lord of the Rings, with its         
pictures of Rivendell, Lorien, and Fangorn Forest, just to name a few.      
These places add to the sense of the history and cultures of                
Middle-earth and place the plot within the framework of this                
history. Many people believe that this balance between the                  
fast-paced action of the here and now and the slow, grand sweep of          
history is part of what makes Tolkien's books stand out as something        
more than just adventure stories.                                           
  The second part of each story concerns the fulfillment of the quest,      
where the hero faces his moment of truth. (Bilbo's part in the quest        
is to help recover the treasure; Frodo's quest is to destroy the            
Ring.) Each must confront his fears and conquer them alone. It is at        
this point that the character appears as a truly heroic figure.             
  The third part of the story concerns a war between the forces of          
good and evil. (In The Lord of the Rings, you will notice, the story        
of the quest and the story of the war are intertwined.) The good            
side seems hopelessly outclassed, but somehow manages to emerge             
victorious at the last minute. Tolkien has been building to this            
moment from the beginning of the story. Each preceding episode also         
seemed bound for disaster. Each time, the danger has become more grim,      
and the hope of rescue has steadily decreased, until the hero has only      
himself to rely on. As the danger increases, so does the level of           
excitement until yet another daring escape is managed.                      
  In The Hobbit the danger and the excitement reach a peak when the         
forces of good seem about to be overcome by the forces of evil. In The      
Lord of the Rings, Tolkien builds to two simultaneous peaks. One            
occurs at the point when Sauron's forces sweep down on the small            
army led by Aragorn at the gates of Mordor. The other occurs inside         
Mordor, as Frodo struggles with Gollum on the edge of the Crack of          
Doom, where the Ring is to be destroyed. Both the war and the quest         
reach their resolution in the same instant, when the Ring is destroyed      
and with it, Sauron's power.                                                
  The fourth and final part of each story serves to wind things             
down. The hero returns home, looking forward to comfort. He finds           
instead that his home is threatened. But he has grown through his           
experiences and is able to regain what is his.                              
  Of course, there are many important differences between the two           
works. The Hobbit follows the story through Bilbo's eyes and tells          
of events in a chronological sequence. In other words, you hear             
about things as they happen, rather than jumping ahead to future            
events, or flashing back to something that happened in the past.            
When Tolkien departs from this chronological sequence in The Hobbit,        
he carefully guides you through the jump in time: "Now if you wish,         
like the dwarves, to hear news of Smaug, you must go back again to the      
evening when he smashed the door and flew off in a rage, two days           
before."                                                                    
  The story line of The Lord of the Rings, on the other hand, is            
much more complicated. The Lord of the Rings is a trilogy,                  
consisting of three volumes (Parts One to Three) divided into six           
sections (Books I through VI). The novel jumps back and forth in time,      
following the stories of several characters. The various story lines        
finally converge near the end when all the characters are reunited          
as Aragorn is crowned king of Gondor. Tolkien uses these shifts in          
viewpoint to good effect, often ending his scenes as cliff-hangers,         
slowly building the tension to its climax. But trying to follow the         
different story lines as he jumps back and forth from one to the other      
can be very difficult. Tolkien doesn't guide you through them as he         
did in The Hobbit. But he does give clues to help you put the pieces        
in order. For example, when Tolkien returns to Sam and Frodo in Book        
VI, he shows you that he's jumping back in time by telling you what         
Merry, Pippin, and Aragorn are doing at the same moment.                    
  Many people have commented that The Hobbit is like a simple fairy         
tale, whereas The Lord of the Rings is more like a great epic poem          
of the past, such as The Odyssey of Homer or Beowulf, the famous Old        
English tale of heroism. Like both fairy tales and epics, Tolkien's         
books are stories of heroism in an imaginary world filled with              
fantastic people and creatures. But The Hobbit, like many fairy tales,      
is first and foremost the story of an individual's growth into              
maturity. It has a fairy-tale ending, with Bilbo smoking happily on         
his pipe many years later, rich from his adventures and satisfied with      
his life. An epic, on the other hand, tries to relate the hero's story      
to a long history and is more concerned with questions of moral             
choices and the fate of all men, than with its individual hero. In          
fact, many epics, such as Beowulf, end with the death of their heroes.      
The Lord of the Rings shares these characteristics of epics. Unlike         
Bilbo, Frodo doesn't live happily ever after. He's been wounded             
physically and also psychically by the loss of the Ring. His passage        
to the Blessed Realm at the end of the book may be interpreted as a         
symbolic death.                                                             
  Part of Tolkien's genius lies in the way he combined the forms of         
fairy tale and epic. The heroes of most epics are larger than life,         
possessing great strength and ability, like the superheroes of comic        
books. But people nowadays find it hard to identify with such               
impossible heroes. Frodo, an ordinary person who has been thrust            
into a situation beyond his abilities, is a more suitable hero for a        
modern audience. Aragorn, on the other hand, is a classic epic hero.        
But he has a fairy-tale ending, winning a kingdom and marrying his          
lifelong love. So you see, Tolkien didn't just copy the old forms of        
fairy tale and epic. He reworked them to meet the needs of a modern         
audience. From the great success of his books, he seems to have             
achieved his goal.                                                          
                                                                            
STORIES                                                                     
                             THE STORIES                    (TLOREXPL)      
-                                                                           
  In this discussion, the chapters in The Hobbit and The Lord of the        
Rings are grouped into sections. The sections in The Hobbit correspond      
to the series of adventures of Bilbo. Tolkien himself divided The Lord      
of the Rings into six sections, or books. In our discussion of the          
story, each of the six books is further divided into two roughly equal      
parts.                                                                      
                                                                            
HOBBIT|CH_1_3                                                               
                              THE HOBBIT                    (THOBSTOR)      
-                                                                           
                             CHAPTERS 1-3                                   
-                                                                           
  Bilbo sets out on his adventure with Gandalf and the dwarves.             
After a near-fatal encounter with three trolls, the travelers arrive        
in the haven of Rivendell.                                                  
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Bilbo Baggins is a well-to-do, respectable hobbit who lives alone in      
his tidy hobbit-hole. The comfortable order of his life is disrupted        
one day when Gandalf the wizard and thirteen dwarves arrive at his          
door. Trying to act as though nothing is out of the ordinary, Bilbo         
invites them in for tea and cakes. Bilbo's predicament is amusing to        
many readers, as he runs around red-faced and flustered, answering the      
doorbell and serving his uninvited guests.                                  
  This kind of humor is one aspect of Tolkien's style that some             
readers dislike, finding it too childish and simple. Others consider        
it delightful. It serves an important purpose, however. You may find        
the existence of dwarves, wizards, and hobbits hard to accept. Tolkien      
anticipates that reaction and gently ridicules his characters,              
hoping to disarm you. He doesn't yet require you to take them               
seriously.                                                                  
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE ORIGINS OF HOBBITS  The best information on how Tolkien         
developed his hobbits comes from the author himself: "The Hobbits           
are just rustic English people, made small in size because it reflects      
the generally small reach of their imagination- not the small reach of      
their courage or latent power." He also admitted to what may seem a         
surprising literary source, the novel Babbitt by Sinclair Lewis, an         
unsympathetic portrayal of an American businessman. How does the            
main character in that book relate to Tolkien's hobbits? According          
to Tolkien, "Babbitt has the same bourgeois smugness that hobbits           
do. His world is the same limited place."                                   
  Unlike Sinclair Lewis and Babbitt, Tolkien portrays his hobbits in a      
sympathetic light. Tolkien often compared himself to hobbits and            
once said, "[They were] just what I could have liked to have been, but      
never was." You may wonder why anyone would want to be like Bilbo           
Baggins. You will have to wait to see what it is that makes hobbits so      
special to Tolkien and hobbit fans.                                         
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Thorin, the dwarves' self-important leader, is the grandson of            
Thrain, who once ruled a kingdom of dwarves under the Lonely Mountain.      
One day a dragon named Smaug descended on the mountain, killing most        
of the dwarves and stealing their treasure. Now Thorin and the other        
twelve dwarves intend to return to the mountain, avenge their kin, and      
recover the treasure.                                                       
  Gandalf has picked Bilbo to be their burglar, but the dwarves aren't      
too happy with the wizard's choice. Bilbo certainly doesn't seem            
very qualified for the job. He's a timid little fellow who faints at        
the talk of danger. But Gandalf says that there's more to Bilbo than        
even Bilbo realizes. Under Gandalf's fierce gaze, the dwarves               
relent. But have they really accepted the hobbit?                           
  Bilbo doesn't seem to be too sure that he wants to be a burglar.          
Part of him longs for adventure, but another part wants to be left          
alone to enjoy his comfortable life. What do you think makes him            
decide to join the dwarves?                                                 
  In the morning, Bilbo and the dwarves get on their way. After a           
pleasant start, they face the first of many dangers on their                
journey. As a cold, rainy evening sets in, they discover that               
Gandalf has left them. Then they see a light among the trees ahead,         
and Bilbo is sent to investigate, supposedly because he's the burglar.      
With a hobbit's knack for walking silently, he approaches the fire          
without being seen. There he finds three huge trolls. Instead of going      
back to report to the dwarves, he attempts to pick the pocket of one        
of the trolls and is captured. Soon the dwarves are captured as well.       
  The scene with the trolls has some good examples of how Tolkien lets      
his characters describe themselves through their actions and their          
speech, a commendable element of good fiction writing. Bilbo walks          
"primly" through the trees and sniffs at the dwarves' noisiness.            
What kind of person does that bring to mind? And you get a good idea        
of what the trolls are like by the way they eat and speak.                  
  What do you think of the dwarves so far? They seem to be taking           
advantage of Bilbo when they send him ahead, but they're also quick to      
come help him. Thorin is almost heroic when he valiantly takes on           
all three trolls to save his friends. But he too ends up tied in a          
sack like the others. The dwarves apparently have bungled the rescue        
as badly as Bilbo bungled his pickpocket attempt.                           
  Fortunately, Gandalf returns and rescues his friends through a            
clever bit of ventriloquism. By imitating the voice of first one troll      
and then another, he manages to keep them arguing until dawn, when          
they are turned to stone. Before going on, Gandalf and Thorin take          
swords from the trolls' hoard. Bilbo picks up a dagger that suits           
him well as a sword.                                                        
  Gandalf leads the band to Rivendell, where Elrond, chief of the           
Half-elven, lives. In the ancient tales that Tolkien studied, elves         
were a race of beautiful and magical people. But since then, elves          
have come to be thought of as tiny, mischievous creatures who live          
in flower buds and ride in coaches drawn by insects. Tolkien tried          
to restore elves to their original stature.                                 
  When Bilbo and the dwarves arrive in Rivendell, the elves at first        
appear foolish, singing silly songs and laughing merrily. But               
Tolkien warns you that it is unwise to let yourself be deceived by          
appearances. Through the wise and noble character of Elrond, he             
reveals the more heroic aspect of elves. You learn that long ago            
they fought beside men in a great war against the goblins. The              
swords that Gandalf and Thorin took from the trolls' hoard had been         
made by the High Elves to be used in that war.                              
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE NAMING OF SWORDS  In ancient tales, most heroes named           
their swords. King Arthur's sword, for example, was called                  
Excalibur. By giving names to Thorin and Gandalf's swords, Tolkien          
places those warriors in the company of such great heroes. Notice that      
Bilbo's sword isn't mentioned, and it remains nameless. Do you think        
there is any significance in this?                                          
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
                                                                            
HOBBIT|CH_4_6                                                               
                             CHAPTERS 4-6                                   
-                                                                           
  The travelers are captured by goblins in the Misty Mountains. In the      
goblin tunnels, Bilbo finds a magic ring and meets its previous owner,      
Gollum. With the help of the ring, Bilbo escapes the tunnels and            
rejoins his friends.                                                        
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Days later, Thorin and the company cross the Misty Mountains and are      
attacked by goblins. All but Gandalf are captured and carried               
through a maze of tunnels into the heart of the mountain. Tolkien           
tells you that the goblins are "cruel, wicked, and bad-hearted," and        
in his description of them you can see the beginnings of his concept        
of evil. Their hatred of others is an important part of evil. They          
deny others free will by enslaving them, and they create nothing of         
beauty. Tolkien also makes an association here between evil and             
technology, particularly the technology of war- "the ingenious devices      
for killing large numbers of people at once."                               
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: TOLKIEN'S USE OF SONG  One of the purposes of songs in The          
Hobbit is to characterize the different races. In chapter I, the            
dwarves' song expresses their love for treasure. The elves' song in         
chapter 3 expresses their gaiety. The song that the goblins sing is         
reminiscent of pirates and reveals their cruelty. The many                  
one-syllable words and exclamation points give it a savage rhythm that      
Tolkien echoes in the narrative and in the speech of the Great Goblin.      
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Once again, Gandalf comes to the rescue. He kills the Great Goblin        
and leads Bilbo and the dwarves down the tunnels. Notice how Tolkien        
uses personification to describe Gandalf's sword. It "burned with a         
rage" at the presence of goblins and now gleams "bright as blue             
flame for delight" in killing their leader.                                 
  The angry goblins chase after their escaping prisoners. In the            
confusion, Bilbo falls, bumps his head, and is knocked unconscious.         
  When he wakes up, Bilbo finds himself alone in the dark. While            
groping around blindly, he comes upon a ring and slips it into his          
pocket. Tolkien tells you that this is a turning point in Bilbo's           
career, but doesn't say why.                                                
  Bilbo searches in his pockets for matches to light his pipe. He           
doesn't find them but does come upon his sword, which he draws out.         
This action is highly significant, for while smoking a pipe just            
then would have been both stupid and hobbitlike, the decision to            
draw his sword could be a sign of Bilbo's growing independence. He          
sets off down the tunnel and at an underground lake meets Gollum,           
one of Tolkien's most unforgettable creations.                              
  It is Gollum's speech that is most remarkable. He hisses as he            
talks, and calls himself "we" and "my precious." He never speaks            
directly to Bilbo; he talks to himself and refers to Bilbo as "it."         
This way of speaking shows the selfishness of evil: Gollum treats           
Bilbo as an object- a potential meal- rather than as an individual          
with free will. In accordance with Tolkien's theme that nothing starts      
out evil, Gollum was once a sun-loving creature like Bilbo. For some        
reason not yet disclosed to the reader, Gollum was driven from his          
home and eventually found his way to the lake in the middle of the          
mountain. (You will learn more about Gollum's life, such as how he          
came to the underground lake, in The Lord of the Rings.)                    
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: RIDDLE GAMES  Back in the times when people first told the          
legends of King Arthur and Siegfried the dragon-killer, they didn't         
have as much in the way of entertainment as we do today. Instead, they      
had to entertain themselves. One way they did this was by playing           
riddle games. The first person who failed to answer a riddle lost           
the game. Riddle games were so popular that they became a common            
feature in folklore and legend. In these legendary games the stakes         
were often high: the loser would forfeit a valuable magical treasure        
or even his life. Tolkien drew directly on these stories when he            
devised the riddle game between Gollum and Bilbo. In this case, if          
Bilbo loses, Gollum will eat him. Fortunately, Bilbo manages to             
stump Gollum with an unorthodox riddle: "What have I got in my              
pocket?" (This leads some people to question whether Bilbo won the          
game fairly.) The other riddles that appear in this scene are old           
standards, not only in Middle-earth but also in our own world. In           
fact, many of these riddles were favorites of the ancient Norse and         
Anglo-Saxons, and can be found in their writings that have been             
preserved through the centuries.                                            
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The ring that Bilbo discovered belongs to Gollum, who lost it             
hunting goblins in the tunnel. Gollum is obsessed with his ring,            
calling it by the name he uses for himself: "my precious." He lets out      
a horrible screech when he realizes it's gone and Bilbo has it. He          
rushes toward Bilbo in a murderous rage. Bilbo flees, and the ring          
somehow slips onto his finger.                                              
  As he runs down the dark tunnel, Bilbo trips and falls, but Gollum        
continues past him. Realizing the ring has made him invisible, Bilbo        
uses it to escape Gollum and slip out the goblins' back door. Gollum        
shrieks after Bilbo: "Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it, we         
hates it, we hates it for ever!" Is Bilbo a thief? Do you feel any          
sympathy for Gollum? Why or why not?                                        
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: RESPONSIBLE USE OF POWER  The ring represents great power.          
Gollum used it to sneak up on goblins and kill them, and had planned        
to use it in the same way to kill Bilbo. Bilbo could also have used         
the ring against Gollum, but instead he jumps over Gollum's head and        
runs away. He does this both out of sympathy for Gollum and because of      
his sense of fair play. Do you think he's foolish to take such a            
chance?                                                                     
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Bilbo emerges from the goblin tunnels and realizes that he's come         
through all the way to the other side of the mountain. Alone, with          
no idea what has happened to his friends, he decides to go back into        
the tunnels to find them. just then he hears the voices of his              
companions. Since he's wearing the ring, the others can't see him.          
As he approaches, the dwarves are saying that they don't want to go         
back to find Bilbo, while Gandalf is insisting that they must. Bilbo        
takes off his ring and suddenly appears, surprising them all.               
  Here Tolkien shows you Bilbo as morally superior to the dwarves.          
He was willing to go back into the tunnels alone to try to find             
them, but they prefer to leave him to the goblins rather than to            
risk getting caught themselves. You may say that the dwarves are            
just being realistic and that Bilbo is naively idealistic. How does         
this relate to Tolkien's theme that you must do what is right, no           
matter what the consequences?                                               
  Bilbo tells about his encounter with Gollum but doesn't mention           
the ring. The dwarves are greatly impressed. Gandalf gives Bilbo a          
queer look, as if he suspects Bilbo hasn't told the whole truth.            
  Knowing the goblins will pursue once night falls, the adventurers         
travel well into the night. They stop at last, but soon hear the            
howling of wolves. As they scramble into trees, a pack of wolves run        
into the clearing.                                                          
  These are no ordinary wolves. They are Wargs, allies of the goblins,      
and Bilbo and his friends are trapped.                                      
  Far away, the Lord of the Eagles hears the commotion and with his         
followers decides to investigate.                                           
  Meanwhile, the goblins arrive in the clearing. Gandalf prepares to        
jump down among them and kill as many as he can before he dies. Just        
then, the eagles arrive and carry Bilbo and the others off to their         
home on the mountain peak. There the eagles bring them food:                
animals, which the dwarves prepare and cook. Tolkien again                  
emphasizes how out of place Bilbo is with the dwarves. He doesn't know      
how to skin and cut up meat; he's used to having it delivered by the        
butcher!                                                                    
                                                                            
HOBBIT|CH_7_9                                                               
                             CHAPTERS 7-9                                   
-                                                                           
  After enjoying the hospitality of Beorn, the shape-changer, Bilbo         
and the dwarves travel through Mirkwood Forest. Bilbo has an                
opportunity to prove himself by twice coming to the dwarves' rescue.        
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  The next morning, the eagles deliver the travelers to the top of a        
great rock near the house of someone named Beorn. Gandalf warns the         
company that Beorn, a very great man, is easily angered; they must          
be very polite to him.                                                      
  Beorn, whom Gandalf describes as part bear, part man, gives the           
group food and advice for their journey: They will have to travel           
through the terrible forest of Mirkwood, but should stay on the path        
and not drink or bathe in the water of a certain stream. He also gives      
them ponies but asks that they be returned when the travelers reach         
the edge of the woods.                                                      
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: Beorn is a typical hero of the old legends. He is self-assured      
and seldom polite. He's also extremely fierce, almost bloodthirsty, as      
shown by the goblin head on the post outside his house. Unlike the          
ancient heroes, however, Beorn seems to belong more to the world of         
animals than to the world of men. He speaks with his animals, who           
are friends rather than possessions. He associates with bears and           
can turn into one himself. On the other hand, he tries to avoid             
people, never liking more than one visitor at a time. In The Lord of        
the Rings you'll find other characters who, like Beorn, are closely         
associated with nature.                                                     
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The company reaches Mirkwood in four days. The dwarves want to            
keep the ponies, but Gandalf insists they be sent back. Then Gandalf        
says goodbye, and Bilbo and the dwarves are on their own.                   
  As the band travels through the eerie forest of Mirkwood, Bilbo           
has an opportunity to convincingly prove his worth to the others. At        
one point, he becomes separated from the band. A giant spider               
attacks him and- alone and in the dark- he kills it with his sword.         
This serves as an initiation for Bilbo, and, proud of his victory,          
he finally names his sword; he calls it Sting.                              
  Feeling bolder, Bilbo searches for his friends, only to find them         
prisoners of the spiders. Using his ring to become invisible, he sings      
insulting songs about the spiders and frees enough of the band so they      
can fight their way to safety. This is the first time Bilbo has made        
up a song, and it's the beginning of his transition into the heroic         
world, where the use of songs and the naming of swords are                  
commonplace.                                                                
  Bilbo has won the respect of the dwarves. Even though he has had          
to reveal the secret of the ring, they admire his courage and               
ingenuity in using it. They begin to look to him for help, just as          
they used to look to Gandalf. Then suddenly they realize Thorin is          
missing. It's too dark to look for him, so they go to sleep with            
this new trouble on their minds.                                            
  We learn that Thorin has been captured by Wood-elves, who, though         
good, are not friendly to dwarves. Knowing their king is greedy for         
treasure, Thorin refuses to answer his questions and is imprisoned.         
  As they wander in the forest the next evening, the rest of the            
dwarves are captured by the Wood-elves. Bilbo evades capture by             
slipping on his ring. The captives are taken to the king's palace           
and imprisoned when they refuse to answer questions. Bilbo, invisible,      
wanders around the palace. Ironically, he now lives up to his role          
as burglar, sneaking around and stealing food. He finds the imprisoned      
dwarves, who are quite confident the hobbit will rescue them. Bilbo         
isn't so hopeful and wishes that Gandalf were around. But with growing      
maturity, he realizes that if the dwarves are to be rescued, he must        
do it himself. You can see that Bilbo has grown from a helpless,            
foolish hobbit into someone who can take responsibility not only for        
himself, but for the lives of others. And yet Bilbo is also                 
dependent on the dwarves; he wouldn't know where to go or what to do        
without them.                                                               
  With a great deal of luck and ingenuity, Bilbo manages to free his        
friends, then packs them into empty barrels, which the elves throw          
into a stream that runs under the palace. They all float off down           
the stream, with Bilbo clinging to an empty barrel.                         
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: Much is made of Bilbo's luck in this chapter. Yet it was not        
merely luck that made him successful: Bilbo was prepared to take            
advantage of his luck. Throughout The Hobbit and The Lord of the            
Rings, watch for other instances where luck serves to help individuals      
who are already trying to help themselves.                                  
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
                                                                            
HOBBIT|CH_10_13                                                             
                            CHAPTERS 10-13                                  
-                                                                           
  Bilbo and the dwarves are helped by the people of Lake-town, which        
lies in the shadow of the Lonely Mountain. The adventurers at last          
reach the mountain, and Bilbo comes face to face with the dragon            
Smaug.                                                                      
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  The barrels, along with Bilbo and the dwarves, have floated down the      
river to Lake-town, in the shadow of the Lonely Mountain where Smaug        
the dragon lives. The arrival of the dwarves, after Bilbo frees them        
from the barrels, sparks great excitement. The town had been very           
prosperous before the coming of Smaug, and old songs predict that good      
times would return with the dwarves. People begin to sing the old           
songs and say that the prophecy will be fulfilled. Treated like             
heroes, the dwarves are given a large house and good food, and are          
wildly cheered in public.                                                   
  The warm reception the dwarves receive may seem odd to you. After         
all, they haven't done anything yet. But traditionally there is a           
certain type of hero who is rewarded before the deed. This is the           
person who is about to undertake a great task for the sake of his           
people, and who is as likely to dies in the attempt as to return            
successfully. The first U.S. astronauts in the late 1950s were such         
heroes, receiving great fame and adulation before the first mission         
was ever launched.                                                          
  The dwarves at last depart for the Lonely Mountain with ponies and        
supplies provided by the town. They are given a warm send-off and           
everyone is in high spirits- everyone, that is, except Bilbo, who's         
very unhappy at the thought of approaching Smaug's lair. This is            
reminiscent of Gandalf, who is wise enough to be aware of dangers even      
when everyone else forgets them.                                            
  The land around the Lonely Mountain has been desolated by the             
dragon. The dwarves are grim and sad as they remember how beautiful it      
once was. Yet, as their spirits droop, Bilbo's seem to lift. He             
studies Thorin's map and convinces the dwarves to search for the            
secret door. At last they find it, far up the mountain's slope, but         
they lose hope again when they fail to open the door. They blame Bilbo      
(since he's the burglar) and consider sending him through the front         
gate of the dragon's lair.                                                  
  Once again it's Bilbo who takes charge and solves their problems. He      
remembers the secret runes (mysterious writing) that Elrond had             
discovered on the map, Just as the runes said, the last ray of the sun      
reveals the keyhole to the secret door, and at last the way is open.        
  You see how much the dwarves have come to rely on Bilbo. He has in        
effect become their leader. Yet does he get the respect due a               
leader? Why do you think the dwarves treat him the way they do?             
  In chapter 12, Bilbo twice ventures down the secret passage to the        
lair of Smaug. The first time, the dwarves send him, saying that            
it's time for him to be the burglar. This is similar to the scene in        
chapter 2, where they send him to investigate the trolls' fire. But         
there are several important differences between the two episodes            
that clearly show the changes in Bilbo. He is now more assertive            
with the dwarves, pointing out that he's already won his share of           
the treasure by rescuing them twice. But he says he'll go anyway- he's      
begun to trust his luck more- and dares any of the dwarves to come          
with him. Do you agree with the narrator's defense of the dwarves'          
refusal to go with him (except for Balin, who goes part of the way)         
that it's Bilbo's job for which he'll be paid very well?                    
  Bilbo is terrified but determined to see things through. When he          
hears the rumbling of the dragon's breath, he pauses for a moment.          
Facing his fear and going on despite it is the bravest thing he's ever      
done. This sort of courage is the basis of Tolkien's idea of                
heroism, which he sees as something internal, rather than as the doing      
of great deeds. Once Bilbo reaches Smaug's lair, he successfully            
steals a cup from the dragon's hoard and carries it back with him.          
(Compare this to his bungling in the scene with the trolls.)                
  Smaug awakes to discover the cup is missing. He goes on a rampage,        
searching the mountainside for the thief. Some of the dwarves risk          
their lives to rescue two of their company who had stayed with the          
ponies further down the mountain. What do you think Tolkien is              
trying to tell you through this act of heroism by the dwarves? Is           
there a limit to the dwarves' kind of heroism?                              
  Bilbo goes down to the dragon's lair once again- but this time on         
his own initiative. He has a conversation with the wily Smaug and           
holds his own admirably. Smaug is the essence of politeness, yet            
full of veiled threat. Bilbo intrigues him with riddles by giving           
himself many names that refer to his adventures. Barrel-rider, for          
example, refers to his escape from the Wood-elves. (This kind of            
name-giving is a common habit among heroes of legend and folklore.)         
Smaug tries to plant suspicions in Bilbo's mind against the dwarves,        
but the hobbit remains true to his friends. Is all that Smaug says          
untrue? Bilbo cleverly tricks Smaug into revealing a bare spot in           
his armor of gems. With a parting taunt Bilbo leaves, getting his hair      
and heels singed for his boldness.                                          
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: DRAGONS IN LEGEND AND LITERATURE  Smaug has been compared most      
often to Fafnir, a dragon from the Scandinavian legends, and to the         
dragon in Beowulf. Both these famous dragons brood over a treasure,         
Fafnir in a cave, and the other in a castle. The hero Sigurd comes          
seeking Fafnir's treasure, and the dragon engages him first in              
conversation. A wily talker like Smaug, Fafnir manages to raise             
suspicions in Sigurd's mind about the trustworthiness of his                
companions. Fafnir is killed when Sigurd hides in a hole and thrusts        
his sword into the dragon's soft belly. The fire-breathing dragon in        
Beowulf ravages the countryside in a rage after a thief steals a            
single cup from his great hoard. Beowulf, as leader of his people,          
undertakes the task of killing this menace. He succeeds but is              
mortally wounded by the dragon.                                             
  Tolkien drew on both these stories in The Hobbit. He also drew on         
the common association of dragons with the destruction of landscapes        
(the desolation by Smaug), with the possession of one vulnerable spot,      
with the insatiable desire for material possessions, and with evil          
(some dragons were thought to be the Devil himself).                        
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Bilbo tells his tale to the dwarves, while a thrush listens               
nearby. Remember this bird, because it will become an important part        
of the plot in chapter 14. Bilbo grows increasingly uneasy about the        
dragon, and at his insistence the company hides in the secret passage.      
They shut the door- just in time, for Smaug attacks the doorway.            
They're trapped, but at least they're still alive. Meanwhile Smaug,         
satisfied he's taken care of the intruders, departs for Lake-town.          
  After what seems days of waiting, with no hint of Smaug's                 
presence, the dwarves follow Bilbo down the tunnel to the dragon's          
lair. Bilbo ventures into the dark cavern alone and in the light of         
a torch discovers the Arkenstone. Thorin had spoken of this great           
jewel the night before. It had been mined from the Lonely Mountain and      
is greatly prized by the dwarves. Bilbo hides it in his pocket, not         
telling the dwarves of his discovery.                                       
  The dwarves are excited by the sight of so much treasure. They            
clad themselves in armor from the hoard and give a suit of mail to          
Bilbo. Bilbo feels magnificent wearing it, but suspects he looks            
silly. Unlike the dwarves, he's not bewitched by the treasure,              
realizing that they're not yet out of trouble. You can see how Bilbo        
remains down-to-earth, not carried away by the situations he finds          
himself in. Neither does he get caught up in visions of himself as a        
great hero in his armor. Thoughts of home help him keep things in           
perspective.                                                                
                                                                            
HOBBIT|CH_14_17                                                             
                            CHAPTERS 14-17                                  
-                                                                           
  After Smaug is killed by a man of Lake-town, an army of men and           
elves sets out for the mountain to recover Smaug's hoard. Instead they      
find the dwarves in possession of the treasure. The dispute over the        
wealth is about to erupt into war when an army of goblins and Wargs         
attacks.                                                                    
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Tolkien takes you back to the night that Smaug destroyed the              
secret door, trapping the dwarves inside the passage. After doing           
so, Smaug descends on Lake-town, which Tolkien now calls by the name        
Esgaroth. (This sudden switch in name is unexplained.) The townspeople      
resist at first, but faced by Smaug's wrath, they soon flee. The            
Master of the town sneaks off in his boat, trying to save himself.          
Only a small band of archers hold their ground, led by a man named          
Bard. Bard is descended from the lord of Dale, who was killed when          
Smaug first drove the dwarves from the Lonely Mountain and destroyed        
the town of Dale. Bard refuses to quit what seems a hopeless battle,        
even though his companions are ready to leave him. Suddenly a               
thrush- the same bird who listened to Bilbo tell the dwarves about his      
conversation with the dragon- perches on Bard's shoulder and reveals        
the vulnerable spot that Bilbo had discovered in Smaug's armor. Bard        
fits his last arrow to his bow and kills the dragon. Smaug plunges          
into the lake, destroying the town.                                         
  The townspeople now turn on the Master for abandoning the town. They      
talk of making Bard their king. But the Master cleverly diverts them        
by turning their anger toward the dwarves, saying that they aroused         
Smaug in the first place. He also declares that if Bard is to be            
king he should rebuild the ruins of Dale and rule there, not in             
Lake-town. For now, Bard takes the lead in making sure the people of        
Lake-town have shelter and food. He sends a messenger to the king of        
the Wood-elves asking for help.                                             
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE IDEAL LEADER  In comparing Bard to the Master of                
Lake-town, Tolkien presents his ideas about an ideal leader. Bard           
becomes a leader by proving himself as a warrior; the Master leads          
by virtue of his business acumen. Bard, a true leader, is willing to        
risk his life to save the town; the Master places his own interests         
and safety above those of his people. Tolkien is making a point that a      
leader should serve his people rather than use his position to further      
his own ends. Bard speaks openly, even saying things that others don't      
want to hear, as when he warns them that death, rather than wealth,         
may result from the dwarves' expedition to the mountain. The Master,        
on the other hand, tells his people what they want to hear and              
manipulates them by appealing to baser emotions such as greed and           
desire for revenge. What are the characteristics of other leaders that      
appear in The Hobbit? In what ways are they like Bard or like the           
Master? Keep the image of a grim warrior-leader in mind, for it will        
reappear in The Lord of the Rings in the character of Aragorn.              
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The Elvenking has already received news of Smaug's death from the         
birds and is journeying with a large host toward the Lonely Mountain        
to seize the dragon's hoard of treasure. But he turns aside to help         
the lake people. What does this tell you about the Wood-elves? Do           
you find your attitude toward them changing? The building of a new          
town is begun under the Master's direction. The elves, accompanied          
by Bard and his men, set out for the Lonely Mountain.                       
  The dwarves are not caught unaware, for they are told of Smaug's          
death and the approaching army by ravens, who have long been friends        
with the race of dwarves. Although the ancient chief of the ravens          
advises them to make peace, the dwarves begin to fortify the                
approach to the mountain. Messages are sent to Thorin's relatives           
asking for help.                                                            
  When the Lake-men and the elves finally arrive, Bard claims the           
share of the treasure that was stolen from the town of Dale. Thorin         
refuses, and so the army of men and elves besieges the mountain.            
  In chapter 15, Tolkien hints at the tragedy of war. The dwarves hear      
music from the camp and wish they could have welcomed these enemies as      
friends. Bilbo longs to be among the elves, feasting and laughing. Why      
then do the dwarves refuse to parley? Is it only their greed for            
treasure, as the narrator seems to imply, or do you think that some of      
Thorin's arguments are valid?                                               
  Not at all happy with the prospect of war, Bilbo comes up with a          
plan to try to prevent it. Putting on his ring and carrying the             
Arkenstone, he slips away from the dwarves. He brings the stone to          
Bard, hoping it can be used to bargain with Thorin. Bard, the               
Elvenking, and Gandalf, who reappears in the elves' camp, praise the        
hobbit for his action. Then Bilbo returns to the dwarves' camp.             
  It may seem strange to you that Bilbo should return to the                
dwarves, who will certainly be angry with what he's done. But Bilbo         
will not desert his friends. To understand this is to understand            
much of Tolkien's idea of the greatness of the common people. Bilbo         
has very simple values and stands by them. One thing he values              
highly is friends. Another thing he values highly is the comfortable        
life he led in Bag End. Throughout the adventure Bilbo keeps                
thinking of his home, enabling him to keep things in perspective,           
something the dwarves have failed to do. He realizes that the dwarves'      
gold isn't much good without food or without the friendship of their        
neighbors. He just wants to see the whole thing come to an end, and         
this is what prompts him to give up the Arkenstone.                         
  Bard reveals to Thorin that he has the Arkenstone. In his anger           
Thorin almost throws Bilbo over the wall. Thorin reluctantly agrees to      
give up one-fourteenth of the treasure- Bilbo's share- in return for        
the Arkenstone. While Bilbo goes down to join Gandalf, Thorin is            
already thinking of a way to go back on his word. Dain, his cousin, is      
now approaching with an army of dwarves. Thorin wonders if he can           
recapture the Arkenstone with Dain's help and avoid paying Bilbo's          
share of the treasure. In chapter 14, Tolkien had said that the             
dwarves were affected by the bewitchment of the treasure. Now he            
says something similar when he attributes Thorin's actions to the           
bewilderment of the treasure. What do you think Tolkien is implying?        
  When Dain arrives, he finds his way barred by the other army, and he      
attacks. But a new army suddenly appears, made up of goblins and            
Wargs. Their quarrels forgotten, Dain's army joins with the men and         
elves to meet this new foe. Despite valiant resistance on the part          
of the combined forces, the goblins seem assured of victory. Bilbo          
contemplates the idea of defeat. In old songs and legends it is said        
that defeat is glorious, but Bilbo finds it very distressing.               
Tolkien at this point speaks from his own experience in the Battle          
of the Somme.                                                               
  The attack of the goblins is in some ways beneficial, for it              
prevents a tragic war between races who should be allies. Squabbles         
over gold are shown to be petty. The forces of good unite against a         
common evil, in a desperate fight for survival. In this fight, even         
Thorin and his companions are able to redeem themselves.                    
  As a sign of the change in the dwarves, from petty greed to noble         
courage, Tolkien uses heroic language to describe them. "Hood and           
cloak were gone; they were in shining armour, and red light leapt from      
their eyes. In the gloom the great dwarf gleamed like gold in a             
dying fire." The second sentence even has the rhythms of the Old            
English poetry that Tolkien admired. Notice too, the many words             
beginning with "g" in that sentence. This is an example of                  
alliteration. Old English poetry, which doesn't use rhymes at the           
end of lines, relies on such techniques as alliteration and meter           
(or rhythm) to give the poem its characteristic sound. Sentences            
such as this reveal Tolkien's painstaking craftsmanship, which may          
go unnoticed on first reading.                                              
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: DWARVES IN LORE AND LITERATURE  In the beginning of The             
Hobbit, Tolkien's dwarves seem to have come right out of the fairy          
tale Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. But like elves, the dwarves of        
fairy tales have degenerated greatly from their origins in myth and         
legends. In The Hobbit, Tolkien reverses that course, elevating his         
dwarves from comic characters to heroic figures.                            
  The names of Tolkien's dwarves, as well as the wizard's name              
(Gandalf), come from a list of dwarves in an ancient book of Norse          
mythology, The Prose Edda, by Snorri Sturlson. This book was an             
attempt to preserve the pagan beliefs and lore that were rapidly            
disappearing in the face of Christianity's growing power in Europe.         
The dwarves of The Prose Edda, typical of traditional dwarves, were         
miners and expert craftsmen who lived in caves and mountains. There         
are many stories of dwarves who created marvelous and magical               
things, and in these stories the dwarves are often cheated of their         
pay. This may have been the inspiration for the dispute over                
treasure and pay between dwarves and elves in The Hobbit. Dwarves have      
also been traditionally associated with the fierce love of treasure         
that characterizes Tolkien's dwarves.                                       
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
                                                                            
HOBBIT|CH_18_19                                                             
                            CHAPTERS 18-19                                  
-                                                                           
  The war is over, and Bilbo finds that he's a hero. After many fond        
farewells, he heads home.                                                   
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Bilbo, who has been knocked unconscious, comes to and finds               
himself alone. The war is over. He returns to camp to find Thorin           
dying. Wanting to make amends with Bilbo, the dwarf says, "If more          
of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a      
merrier world."                                                             
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: REDEMPTION THROUGH COURAGE  A recurrent theme of epics is           
redemption through courage. In the French epic poem Le Chanson de           
Roland ("The Song of Roland"), the hero is Roland, whose desire for         
prestige leads him to take unnecessary risks with his men in battle,        
rather than call for help. Roland's pride (a common flaw of epic            
heroes) leads to disaster for himself and his men. Roland redeems           
himself through heroism in battle, where he continues fighting even         
when there is no hope for victory, and dies of his wounds. Likewise,        
Thorin, who is guilty of greed, has redeemed himself by entering the        
seemingly hopeless battle, risking his life and exhibiting great            
courage.                                                                    
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Bilbo sets out for home with two chests of gold and silver, and           
the friendship of dwarves and elves. When Bilbo and the dwarves say         
good-bye, you can see how they have come to reconcile their                 
differences. Even though Balin's farewell is stiff and formal and           
Bilbo's is comically casual and more modern, the message is the             
same: stop by and visit. Through this, Tolkien points out that,             
despite surface differences, there are underlying similarities uniting      
them. Against a common enemy, all disagreements over wealth and all         
past grudges about perceived wrongs seem petty in comparison.               
Friendship emerges as something of great value.                             
  The war has had its positive aspects. Tolkien tells you that, in the      
years following, the few surviving goblins hide in fear and the             
Wargs vanish completely. The forces of good are free to settle the          
land unmolested.                                                            
  Bilbo begins his journey home, accompanied by Gandalf, and stops          
in Rivendell on the way. The songs of the elves repeat Tolkien's            
antiwar theme: moonlight and starlight and a fire in the hearth are         
more important than gold and silver. But they also add a new twist:         
the elves, who are strongly allied with nature, sing about nature's         
permanence. Kingdoms rise and fall, yet in the valley of Rivendell the      
grass is still growing and the elves are still singing.                     
  Gandalf and Elrond reveal their awareness that this war has not           
vanquished evil; evil has been destroyed before, only to appear             
again in another place. This theme may seem to be an intentional            
foreshadowing of the events later told in The Lord of the Rings, but        
it is not. Tolkien at this point had no intention of taking the             
story of Bilbo and Middle-earth any further.                                
  Still in possession of the magic ring, Bilbo returns home to find         
that he is presumed dead and that his effects are being auctioned off.      
His adventures have prepared him to cope with this problem, however,        
and he soon regains possession of Bag End.                                  
                                                                            
LORD|PT_1|BK_1|CH_1_6                                                       
                        THE LORD OF THE RINGS               (TLORSTOR)      
-                                                                           
                 PART ONE: THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING                       
                         BOOK I, CHAPTERS 1-6                               
-                                                                           
  Frodo Baggins inherits Bilbo's magic ring. Frodo learns that the          
ring belongs to the evil power, Sauron, and flees the Shire with it.        
He and his friends become lost in the mysterious Old Forest, where          
they meet Tom Bombadil.                                                     
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Sixty years have passed since Bilbo returned from the adventure told      
in The Hobbit. He is now preparing for an extended journey,                 
intending never to return to the Shire. He plans to give his house and      
the magic ring to his young cousin and heir, Frodo Baggins. Bilbo           
finds it difficult, however, to part with the ring.                         
  In The Hobbit, Bilbo's ring seemed quite innocent, almost a toy. But      
already it's beginning to take on a sinister aspect. When Gandalf           
presses Bilbo to leave the ring behind, the hobbit becomes                  
uncharacteristically suspicious and angry. He even calls the ring by        
Gollum's name for it: "My precious." There seem to be two sides to his      
personality- his old self who honestly means to leave the ring behind,      
and another self who contrives to keep it. This other self could be         
interpreted as Bilbo's subconscious, acting out his secret wish to          
keep the ring. But there's another possibility- that the ring has           
somehow gained a hold in his mind and is controlling his actions.           
Gandalf, at any rate, finds the change in Bilbo alarming, and at            
last convinces him to leave the ring behind. Do you think Gandalf           
was right to be concerned? Did he force Bilbo to leave the ring, or         
did Bilbo leave it of his own free will?                                    
  The story then jumps ahead almost twenty years. Gandalf visits Frodo      
with disturbing news. At the end of The Hobbit, Gandalf had                 
mentioned that the Necromancer had been driven out of Mirkwood.             
Gandalf now tells Frodo that this Necromancer is none other than            
Sauron, an evil power believed to have been killed long ago. He has         
returned to his ancient stronghold in Mordor and is gathering strength      
to conquer Middle-earth.                                                    
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: Throughout the trilogy, Tolkien uses shadow as a metaphor           
for the evil power of Sauron, giving an impression of evil as being         
somehow insubstantial. Yet its presence is very real. Be alert for          
references to shadow as you read, and in each case try to determine         
how it may relate to evil.                                                  
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
   Sauron once had a ring of power that was taken from him at the           
end of the last war and subsequently lost. It was found again by a          
small hobbitlike creature named Deagol. He was murdered by his              
friend Smeagol, who used the Ring to steal and to spy on his people.        
Given the name Gollum, because of the gurgling sounds he made in his        
throat, Smeagol became so wicked that he was exiled from his home.          
Eventually he found his way to the Misty Mountains and made his home        
in a subterranean lake deep in the mountain's heart. It was there that      
Bilbo met Gollum and gained ownership of the Ring.                          
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE RING: A DOUBLE-EDGED WEAPON  From this point, Tolkien           
refers to Frodo's ring as "the Ring" because of its great                   
importance. The Ring emerges through the course of the story as a           
symbol of the power to control others. The Ring is a dangerous weapon,      
however; while it gives its wearer the power to dominate others, it         
also has the power to dominate those who possess it. Remember               
Bilbo's unwillingness to give it up?                                        
  Some readers see the Ring as a symbol for the atomic bomb. Like           
the Ring, the bomb is a weapon of great power, but it's also dangerous      
to the country that possesses it. Tolkien, however, denied that             
anything in his book stands for any one thing in the real world.            
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Gandalf says that Gollum's story is a sad one that might have             
happened to others, including some hobbits he has known. Do you             
think he's referring to Bilbo? Gandalf also comments that even              
Gollum wasn't wholly corrupted by the Ring: "There was a little corner      
of his mind that was still his own..." He seems to be implying that         
Gollum wasn't evil at first. Gandalf pities Gollum and wonders aloud        
if he could be cured, speaking of evil as if it's a disease. In             
Gandalf's story about Gollum, Tolkien introduces themes that will be        
repeated throughout the book: Nothing starts out evil. Those who do         
fall into evil are hurt by it, but it's always possible for them to be      
redeemed.                                                                   
  Sauron has learned from Gollum that his Ring was found, and for           
the first time he hears of hobbits and the Shire. Sauron will come          
looking for the Ring, Gandalf tells Frodo. When he made the Ring,           
Sauron put most of his power into it, and without it his strength is        
limited. If he can recover the Ring, no one will be able to stop            
him. To keep Sauron from getting it, the Ring must be destroyed.            
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: The Ring must be destroyed because of its power to corrupt          
even the best of individuals. In this way it is similar to a                
treasure appearing in another novel, John Steinbeck's The Pearl. In         
that book a pearl of great value is found by a poor Mexican Indian. He      
finds that it's a curse rather than a blessing, however. The pearl          
appeals to the greed in others, who resort to apalling acts of              
violence in an attempt to possess it. In the end the Indian casts           
the pearl back into the sea, where it can no longer incite men to           
evil. The pearl symbolizes the corrupting lure of wealth, while the         
Ring symbolizes the corrupting effect of power.                             
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Frodo tries to give the Ring to Gandalf, who refuses to take it. The      
Ring would corrupt even him; he would not be able to resist the             
temptation to use it for good. And Gandalf is sure that once he used        
it, the Ring would gain power over him and he'd become another Dark         
Lord, like Sauron.                                                          
  Also, Gandalf says, Frodo was meant to have the Ring. He has been         
chosen by some higher will that has power for good in the world. But        
Gandalf emphasizes that it's Frodo's choice to accept or reject this        
destiny. Tolkien introduces two more of his themes here. One is that        
there is a benevolent force at work that opposes the power of evil,         
and that everyone has a role to play in its grand design. The other is      
that individuals should not be forced to do anything- even to follow        
their roles in the grand scheme of things. For good or bad, all people      
must be free to make their own choices.                                     
  Frodo is woefully unprepared for the challenge. At first he thinks        
the Ring can be destroyed with a hammer or by throwing it into the          
fire. But Gandalf tells him that it can only be destroyed in the            
volcano where it was made, in the Crack of Doom in Mordor. This             
information scares Frodo, and he doubts he'll be able to perform            
such a deed. But for now he accepts the responsibility of guarding the      
Ring and will take it to Rivendell, where it will be out of Sauron's        
grasp.                                                                      
  At this point, Sam Gamgee, the gardener, is discovered                    
eavesdropping. He shows even less comprehension of the situation            
than Frodo does. When told he can accompany Frodo, Sam is overjoyed:        
"Me go and see Elves and all! Hooray!"                                      
  When Frodo at last leaves the Shire, he is accompanied by one of his      
friends, Peregrine Took (Pippin), and by Sam Gamgee. Gandalf was to go      
with them but hasn't been heard from in several months.                     
  This part of the story is filled with vivid descriptions of the           
pleasures of the road: crackling fires, amiable conversation, and,          
most of all, the landscape- trees, fields, and stars. The richness          
of detail, while adding little to the plot, is an important part of         
Tolkien's style. Many readers find that these descriptions make             
Middle-earth and its inhabitants come alive.                                
  The travelers soon find they are being pursued by mysterious Black        
Riders. Twice they are forced to hide in the woods as a Rider               
approaches. Both times they are nearly discovered, and both times           
Frodo is seized with an almost irresistible desire to put on the Ring.      
The first time, for an inexplicable reason, the Rider turns away.           
The second Rider is driven off by the voices of elves, who then             
offer the hobbits protection for the night.                                 
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: The Black Riders give the impression of silent menace. They         
wear black cloaks and hoods; not even their faces can be seen. They         
track the hobbits through a sense of smell, making them seem                
animalistic.                                                                
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The elven leader warns Frodo that the Riders are deadly "servants of      
the Enemy."                                                                 
  In the morning the three hobbits start out, closely pursued by Black      
Riders. They safely reach the house Frodo had bought to hide the            
fact he was planning to leave the Shire. There Frodo is joined by           
Meriadoc Brandybuck (Merry) and Fatty Bolger. Fatty will stay behind        
to keep up the pretense that Frodo is living there, but Merry and           
Pippin insist on going with Frodo, no matter how great the danger.          
Frodo has been told by both Gandalf and the elves that he should            
rely on the help of friends. Though he doesn't want to bring them into      
danger, he's happy to know they'll come. Through Merry, Pippin, and         
Sam, Tolkien is expressing the importance of friendship.                    
  The hobbits decide not to take the road, which is likely to be            
watched by Black Riders. Instead they try to cut through the Old            
Forest. It's a weird place, and it's said that the trees can move,          
hemming in unwelcome strangers. The hobbits are soon lost and find          
themselves on the bank of the River Withywindle, in the heart of the        
forest.                                                                     
  They are sitting in the shade of an old willow when suddenly Merry        
and Pippin are swallowed up by great cracks in the tree. Frodo's cries      
for help are answered by Tom Bombadil, a strange old man with a             
feathered hat. Tom soon forces Old Man Willow to release his captives;      
then he invites them to his home. Tom tells the hobbits that they were      
lucky he came by, for he did not actually hear their cries: "Just           
chance brought me... if chance you call it." Many readers interpret         
this as a hint of some unseen power that guided Tom to come along at        
that moment and save the hobbits.                                           
                                                                            
LORD|PT_1|BK_1|CH_7_12                                                      
                        BOOK I, CHAPTERS 7-12                               
-                                                                           
  The hobbits are safely sent on their way again by Tom. They are           
joined by a mysterious character named Strider, who guides them to          
Rivendell.                                                                  
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  The hobbits meet Tom's beautiful wife, Goldberry, the daughter of         
the River Withywindle. Tom and Goldberry are curious yet appealing          
figures. Tom often speaks in song; even when he isn't singing, his          
words have a singsong quality. His love for Goldberry is touching, and      
when the hobbits first meet him, he is bringing lilies to place in          
bowls around her feet. There seems to be good magic in Tom and              
Goldberry's home, for Tom says that no evil can touch the hobbits           
there. Not even the Ring has power over Tom. When he puts it on, he         
remains visible, and when Frodo puts it on, Tom can still see him.          
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: TOM AND GOLDBERRY AS NATURE SPIRITS  Tom and Goldberry may          
be seen as nature spirits, figures who represent the forces of nature-      
for example, Mother Nature. Another example is Pan, the Greek god of        
the woodlands, who was half man and half goat. Pan was believed to          
be mischievous and fun-loving, but also dangerous when angry. He            
belonged to the world of nature and seldom concerned himself with           
human affairs. Traces of Pan can be seen in Tom Bombadil, with his          
humorous appearance (although Tom is fully human), his lively               
personality, and his power over nature.                                     
  Goldberry tells the hobbits that Tom is the master of wood, water,        
and hill. Tom's songs, such as the one he uses to make Old Man              
Willow release Pippin and Merry, seem to give him power over nature.        
Goldberry shares in this power, for her song brings rain. "This is          
Goldberry's washing day," Tom tells the hobbits.                            
  People who think Tom is a nature spirit say that this is why the          
Ring has no influence on him. The Ring is of the world of man, and Tom      
is of the world of nature. He is untouched by the desire for                
absolute power that the Ring represents.                                    
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The hobbits set off across the barrow-downs, a stretch of land            
that is filled with burial mounds, or barrows. Foolishly lingering          
there until sundown, against Tom's advice, they become lost in fog and      
are captured by a barrow-wight (an evil spirit who inhabits these           
burial mounds and lures travelers to their death). Frodo sings the          
rhymed call for help that Tom Bombadil had taught them, and soon Tom        
arrives to rescue them.                                                     
  While in the barrow, Frodo has again been tempted to put on the           
Ring. You can see how Tolkien's treatment of the Ring has changed from      
The Hobbit. In that book Bilbo often used the Ring to save his              
friends. Now the Ring serves only as a temptation to Frodo to take the      
easy way out and abandon his friends. This is a moment of truth for         
Frodo and relates to Tolkien's theme of the corrupting effect of            
power. Frodo must choose between using the Ring to save himself or          
facing certain death but not compromising his morals. This hints at         
another of Tolkien's themes- refusal to give in to despair. Frodo           
fights, even with no hope of winning, and finds a way to rescue his         
friends. The importance of friendship also comes into play here, for        
it is Frodo's friendship for the others that keeps him from putting on      
the Ring and falling into evil.                                             
  Tom gives each of the hobbits a sword from the barrow. They feel          
awkward wearing them, for they had never thought of fighting. This          
is an idea they'll have to get used to, however, if they are to             
survive. The swords are a sign that the hobbits must start learning to      
take responsibility for themselves.                                         
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE POWER OF LANGUAGE  Tom Bombadil uses song to drive the          
wight from the barrow, just as he used it to force Old Man Willow to        
release Merry and Pippin. He also gives names to the hobbits'               
ponies. There is an ancient belief, held by many primitive people,          
that everything has its own name, in a secret language. Knowing the         
name gives you power over the thing (or person). It seems that Tom's        
mastery over things comes from the power to name them. By giving Tom        
this power, Tolkien introduces a new perspective on language.               
Throughout the book you will see that Tolkien draws attention to            
language in different ways.                                                 
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The hobbits safely reach their next destination, the town of Bree,        
and stay at an inn, the Prancing Pony. Frodo foolishly allows the Ring      
to slip onto his finger. By disappearing, he reveals his identity to        
the watching spies. He is rebuked by a mysterious character called          
Strider, who knows Frodo's name and also seems to know about the Ring.      
Strider offers to join the hobbits as their guide. After initial            
distrust, they decide to accept. They're starting to be aware that          
they've been too careless, and someone with Strider's experience            
will be able to help them.                                                  
  To stay off the road, Strider leads the hobbits along a twisting          
course through the forest, arriving one night at a hill called              
Weathertop. So far there has been no sign of the Black Riders, but          
that night on Weathertop the hobbits are attacked.                          
  Strider has said that the Riders cannot see the world of light; they      
see best in darkness. This is appropriate, for light symbolizes             
good, and darkness evil. When Frodo puts on the Ring, the Riders            
seem suddenly to see him. And Frodo finds that he can now see their         
faces and armor, whereas before they were only shadowy figures. It          
seems he has entered the Riders' world by putting on the Ring.              
Suddenly, one of the Riders attacks Frodo and succeeds in stabbing him      
before being driven off.                                                    
  When Frodo regains consciousness, he learns from the others that          
they had seen little of his encounter with the Black Rider. Frodo           
had seemed to vanish, and the Rider appeared only as a black shadow         
rushing past them. Strider now tends Frodo's wound. The Black               
Rider's knife has deadly magic in it, and already a chill is spreading      
from Frodo's shoulder down his arm and side. Strider says that the          
evil of that knife is beyond his skill to cure, so they all set out         
for Rivendell, hoping that there Frodo can be healed.                       
  On the way they are joined by an Elf-lord, Glorfindel, who has            
been sent from Rivendell by Elrond to find the travelers and help           
them. Glorfindel gives Frodo his own horse, which can outrun the            
steeds of the Black Riders. When the company reaches a ford in the          
river, the Black Riders suddenly appear, and Glorfindel sends his           
horse, with Frodo on it, over the ford. Calling on Frodo to wait,           
the Black Riders start to follow him. He no longer has the strength to      
refuse. Still, he resists their hold to the last, calling out               
defiantly. They only laugh and advance confidently to take him.             
Suddenly the river floods, and on the other shore a shining figure,         
Glorfindel, can be seen driving the Riders into the water. The last         
thing Frodo sees is the Riders and their black horses being carried         
away by the river.                                                          
                                                                            
LORD|PT_1|BK_2|CH_1-5                                                       
                        BOOK II, CHAPTERS 1-5                               
-                                                                           
  A fellowship is formed to accompany Frodo south toward Mordor.            
They pass through the mines of Moria, where Gandalf is lost in              
battle with a Balrog.                                                       
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Frodo awakens in Rivendell to find the wizard sitting by his bed. He      
learns from Gandalf about the Black Riders and the events at the ford.      
The Black Riders, Gandalf tells Frodo, are the nine ringwraiths, men        
who have been enslaved by Sauron through rings of power. Frodo had          
very nearly fallen into their power. If he had not reached Rivendell        
in time, the power of the Rider's knife would have turned him into a        
wraith, under the dominion of Sauron.                                       
  Chapter 1 contains a great deal of information, revealed mostly           
through dialogue. Frodo learns from Gandalf about the nature of the         
elves. The elves had at one time lived in the Blessed Realm, which          
lies beyond the western sea. They now live in both worlds and have          
power over both the seen and unseen. (Later, Tolkien slips in the           
information that the elves are immortal.) Gandalf tells Frodo that          
there is great power in Rivendell to withstand Sauron. He also              
comments that there is power of another kind in the Shire. Can you          
guess what that power is? This is an important question to keep in          
mind as you read the book.                                                  
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: TOLKIEN'S CHRISTIANITY  Tolkien was a devout Christian, and         
some people read The Lord of the Rings as a Christian allegory. In          
chapter 1 you can see why. Frodo learns that the gleaming figure he         
saw by the ford was Glorfindel, appearing in the form that he               
assumes "on the other side" (presumably in the unseen world, though         
perhaps Gandalf is referring to the Blessed Realm). Glorfindel              
sounds almost like an angel, and in fact, some readers believe that         
the elves are angels and that the Blessed Realm is heaven. Tolkien,         
however, strongly denied that his books are allegorical. An example of      
a work intended as Christian allegory is Pilgrim's Progress by John         
Bunyan (1678). In that book the characters journey through an               
imaginary landscape toward heaven. Their journey is the journey of          
life, or of faith, and their adventures represent the pitfalls on           
the way to salvation, such as despair and greed. Tolkien is quoted          
as having said that he never intended to have his book interpreted          
in such a manner. However, he admitted that while religion is never         
mentioned in The Lord of the Rings (in fact, he deliberately deleted        
references to religion), the principles of his faith are deeply             
imbedded in the story. Gandalf's statement that Frodo was chosen to         
bear the Ring hints at the workings of divine providence. Frodo is          
tempted by evil when he feels compelled to put on the Ring. Be alert        
to these religious undertones as you read the book.                         
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  A great feast is held in Frodo's honor. There, Gandalf, Elrond,           
and Glorfindel appear as awe-inspiring figures, a change from The           
Hobbit, where characters are often made fun of. After the feast, Frodo      
finds Bilbo in a large hall where the elves now gather to sing and          
talk.                                                                       
  One small event casts a pall on the evening. When Bilbo asks to           
see the Ring and Frodo shows it to him, it is as if a shadow                
suddenly falls between the two hobbits. (Note again Tolkien's use of        
shadow as a symbol for evil.) Frodo sees Bilbo as a wrinkled, grasping      
creature and feels an urge to hit him. Around them, the singing of the      
elves falters, and there is sudden silence. Bilbo realizes that the         
Ring has already affected Frodo's personality.                              
  Strider is also revealed as an awe-inspiring figure, one of the           
few remaining descendants of a great and ancient race of men, the           
Numenorea. Strider's true name is Aragorn; to show his new status in        
the book, he is called by that name, instead of Strider.                    
  Notice the star imagery in chapter 1. In Elrond's eyes is a light         
like the light of stars. Bilbo twice refers to stars: first in his          
song about Earendil, who is turned into a star, and at the end of           
the chapter, when he says he will go to look at the stars of Elbereth.      
(Elbereth is a being from the Blessed Realm who is believed by the          
elves to have created the stars.) Aragorn appears to Frodo as having a      
star shining on his breast. Whereas shadow is a symbol of evil,             
stars emerge in Tolkien's book as a symbol of a distant, yet                
enduring good.                                                              
  A council is held at Rivendell, and all races- dwarves, elves,            
men, and hobbits- are represented. Ostensibly they have come to             
bring news and to seek advice. Yet Elrond says that they have been          
brought here by some higher purpose. The stories they have to tell all      
relate in some way to the rise of Sauron, as well as to the Ring,           
which Frodo now carries.                                                    
  Elrond's story of the Ring encompasses a broad sweep of history, for      
he has lived through three ages and seen evil rise and fall many            
times. Next, Boromir, a man from the country of Gondor to the south,        
tells of Sauron's rise in Mordor. The forces of Gondor are trying to        
hold back the tide of evil, but they're too weak against Sauron's           
might.                                                                      
  Aragorn chooses this moment to reveal that he's the heir of Elendil,      
once king of Gondor, who had been slain in the last battle against          
Sauron many years ago. He has Elendil's broken sword, and the time has      
come for that sword to be reforged and for Aragorn to return to Gondor      
as rightful king.                                                           
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: ELEMENTS OF ELITISM IN THE LORD OF THE RINGS  The passage           
where Aragorn describes his life as a Ranger shows the elitism that         
people see in The Lord of the Rings. Aragorn's words depict an elite        
few who spend their lives facing danger and discomfort for the sake of      
the many, who are simple and weak. The Rangers are scorned for their        
trouble, while the simple folk remain blissfully ignorant of the            
dangers they are being protected from. Aragorn considers it right that      
things should be this way. Do you agree with his theory? Is it              
better for the common people to be kept unaware of the dangers in           
the world? Do you know of governments and leaders who seem to feel          
that way?                                                                   
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Gandalf has the worst news of all. His tale is of the treachery of        
Saruman the White, a wizard like Gandalf, and head of the council that      
drove Sauron from Mirkwood. Secretly Saruman has for some time desired      
the Ring for himself, and when he suspects that Gandalf knows where it      
is, he summons him under the pretext of offering help against the           
Black Riders and Sauron. But instead he tells Gandalf that they must        
join forces and use the power of the Ring to rule Middle-earth.             
While certain evils would have to be tolerated and weaker allies            
cast aside, Saruman claims it would all serve a higher good. When           
Gandalf refuses to join him, Saruman imprisons him on the top of a          
mountain. Gandalf is finally rescued by Gwaihir, the eagle.                 
  The council must now decide what is to be done with the Ring.             
Boromir suggests they use the Ring's power against Sauron. Elrond           
explains that whoever used the Ring to defeat Sauron, no matter how         
noble his purpose, would become just as evil as Sauron, for such is         
the nature of the Ring. The very desire for the Ring corrupts the           
heart, as it corrupted Saruman.                                             
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: NATURE OF GOOD AND EVIL  In this scene you will find many of        
Tolkien's ideas about good and evil. Nothing ever starts out evil-even      
Sauron was good once. Elrond's experience has shown him that evil           
can never be completely vanquished, for it always reappears in a new        
form. And even the temporary victories of good over evil are won            
only at great cost. Yet despite its power, evil has a weakness in that      
it cannot imagine good- for example, Sauron thinks that all people          
desire power as he does, and so he does not expect them to destroy the      
Ring.                                                                       
  The power of good can be seen in the three rings that the elves           
possess. Elrond said that the elven rings were not made to obtain           
wealth or dominion over others, but were made to be used for                
healing, understanding, and creating. This more passive kind of             
power is an alternative to Sauron's (and Saruman's) desire to               
control the world. However, the fate of the elven rings is tied up          
with the fate of the Ruling Ring. If Sauron should regain possession        
of his Ring, he will be able to control the elven rings. If the Ring        
is destroyed, Elrond believes that the power of the elven rings will        
end, and many good and beautiful things will pass from Middle-earth.        
This is another example of Tolkien's theme that the forces of good          
achieve victory only at great cost to themselves. It also presents          
another facet of Tolkien's complex theme of the relationship between        
good and evil; often evil purpose can unintentionally bring about           
beneficial results. In this case, the elven rings were forged at            
Sauron's direction, to win control over elves. Instead the rings            
have brought about much good and are invaluable in the struggle             
against him.                                                                
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Not everyone accepts the fact that the Ring must be destroyed.            
Some feel that to bring the Ring to Mordor would be an act of               
despair or folly. But Gandalf says that it's the only possible path.        
It must be taken even if it seems doomed to failure. Elrond suggests        
that this quest may be undertaken by the weak as well as the strong,        
for neither strength nor wisdom will insure success. Here Tolkien           
stresses his theme of the power of the common man: "Yet such is oft         
the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small hands          
do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere."      
Frodo agrees to take on the task of destroying the Ring, something          
that until now he had hoped to leave to someone else. Elrond says that      
he believes Frodo was chosen for this task and that only he can             
succeed. Yet it's important that he accepts the task of his own free        
will. With this, Tolkien brings up the last of his major themes,            
that of free will. While destiny seems to play a hand in the lives          
of Tolkien's characters, they are free to refuse that destiny, just as      
Frodo is free to refuse to be Ring-bearer.                                  
  Elrond chooses eight companions for Frodo: Gandalf, Aragorn, Gimli        
the dwarf, Legolas the elf, Boromir, Sam, Merry, and Pippin.                
  Aragorn's broken sword is reforged, and he renames it Anduril. In         
place of Frodo's broken sword Bilbo offers him his own sword Sting. In      
this scene between the two hobbits, Tolkien suggests a comparison with      
legendary heroes, such as King Arthur, who draw a sword from a stone        
or tree where it has been imbedded for many years. Here, Bilbo thrusts      
Sting into a beam and Frodo draws it out. The Lord of the Rings has         
many such allusions, which, while not crucial to an understanding of        
the story, add richness to Tolkien's work.                                  
  The company plans to cross the Misty Mountains through the Redhorn        
Gate, but a sudden blizzard forces them to turn back. It seems to have      
been directed against them on purpose, but Gandalf does not believe         
that Sauron was responsible. Rather, he feels that the mountain             
itself, hostile toward travelers, sought to stop them. This serves          
as a reminder, in Tolkien's philosophy, that there are neutral              
forces at work that serve neither good nor evil.                            
  Gandalf leads the company through the mines of Moria, once the            
home of dwarves, but now inhabited by orcs (Tolkien called them             
goblins in The Hobbit) and other evil creatures. Pippin impulsively         
throws a pebble down a well, angering Gandalf, for it may alert the         
orcs to their presence in the mines. Later they are attacked by orcs        
and trolls, and even Sam and Frodo have a chance to prove their             
courage. For the most part, however, the four hobbits must be               
protected and herded about like children as the company flees               
through the mines toward the Great Gate. They reach the bridge of           
Khazad-dum, which arches over a deep chasm. Beyond the bridge lies the      
Great Gate. At that moment a Balrog (a terrifying creature from the         
mines of Moria) appears among their pursuers. Gandalf sends the others      
forward, and on the bridge itself he turns to meet the Balrog.              
  In the confrontation you can see how Tolkien uses his imagery of          
light and shadow, contrasting the light of Gandalf's sword with the         
vast shadow surrounding the Balrog. Before the Balrog, Gandalf seems        
small and frail, as good always does before evil in The Lord of the         
Rings. But appearances can be deceiving, and Gandalf succeeds in            
breaking the Balrog's sword. As he casts the Balrog into the chasm,         
the creature's whip wraps around the wizard's leg. The others watch in      
horror as Gandalf also plunges into the chasm. Then they quickly            
flee to the Great Gate and out into the safety of the sunlight.             
There they stop to mourn the loss of Gandalf.                               
                                                                            
LORD|PT_1|BK_2|CH_6_10                                                      
                        BOOK II, CHAPTERS 6-10                              
-                                                                           
  The band enjoys an interlude in the beautiful forest of                   
Lothlorien. They then continue south, where disaster awaits them.           
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  The company enters the forest of Lothlorien, the home of elves.           
Boromir has heard rumors that this is a perilous place and doesn't          
want to enter. But Aragorn and Legolas know of Lothlorien as a place        
of power that thwarts evil. Like Rivendell, it is a refuge from the         
darkness in the land. At first the travelers are met with suspicion by      
the elves. In such dangerous times the elves can trust no strangers.        
  In Lothlorien (also called Lorien), Frodo feels as though he has          
entered the world of the Elder days, where the ancient past is still        
alive. Lothlorien seems to him to be a timeless land that will neither      
fade nor change. In the wind he hears the sounds of waves and seabirds      
from the distant past.                                                      
  The company meets Galadriel and Celeborn, the rulers of                   
Lothlorien. Galadriel describes how she and her husband have struggled      
against evil through the ages. She speaks of the struggle as the            
long defeat. She tests the members of the fellowship in turn, silently      
offering them the choice of going on into danger or turning aside           
and having the one thing they most desire. As they talk of it later,        
Boromir holds that Galadriel was tempting them and warns that she is a      
danger. Of all the company, he alone fails to recognize the goodness        
in Lorien.                                                                  
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: TOLKIEN AND WOMEN  Tolkien has often been criticized for            
generally ignoring women in his books. There may be merit in this           
argument. Think back to The Hobbit: The only female character was           
Lobelia Sackville-Baggins, a ridiculous and unpleasant hobbit. In           
The Lord of the Rings thus far, you have met only Lobelia,                  
Goldberry, Arwen (Elrond's daughter), and now Galadriel. Galadriel          
is a figure of great power. She seems wiser than her husband,               
Celeborn, and wins over Gimli the dwarf with her kindness. She is           
the one who first called together the White Council that originally         
drove Sauron from Mirkwood. She's also the possessor of one of the          
three elven rings. Equal even to Sauron's power, she can read his           
thoughts, yet he can't find her.                                            
  Galadriel, however, represents an idealized woman, as do Arwen and        
Goldberry. Later in the trilogy, you will meet a contrast in the            
character of Eowyn.                                                         
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  In Lothlorien you can clearly see the way Tolkien equates nature          
with beneficent power. Lothlorien is a place of great natural               
beauty. The elves, who make their houses in the trees, are in close         
contact with nature, leading a simple life-style without technology.        
Sam says that he can't tell if the elves made the land or the land          
made them, proving that he can be surprisingly perceptive at times.         
The magic in Lothlorien is well hidden, yet it is pervasive and             
powerful.                                                                   
  Galadriel offers Sam and Frodo a look in her "mirror," a basin of         
water. In it, Sam sees visions of him and Frodo, then of the Shire. He      
sees trees being cut down and ugly buildings with smoking chimneys          
being built. He wants to return to the Shire at once, but Galadriel         
warns that the mirror can be deceptive.                                     
  Frodo sees in the mirror the great red eye of Sauron, which he feels      
is seeking him. Galadriel tells him not to fear while he's in               
Lothlorien, for Sauron's eye cannot find him there, although she            
herself can read Sauron's thoughts. This echoes what another elf had        
said in a previous chapter: though the light pierces the very heart of      
darkness, the light's own secret has not yet been discovered.               
Galadriel reveals to Frodo that secret: she possesses one of the elven      
rings. It appears as a star upon her hand. If you have any doubts           
about Galadriel's motives, this should answer them, for stars, as           
you know by now, are Tolkien's symbol for good.                             
  Galadriel's fate, and the fate of Lothlorien, are in Frodo's              
hands. If Frodo should fail, Lothlorien will be laid bare to Sauron.        
If Frodo succeeds and the One Ring is destroyed, Galadriel's power          
will diminish and Lorien will fade. Either way, it seems that               
Lothlorien is doomed. Frodo offers the Ring to Galadriel, but she           
refuses it, saying that if she used it against Sauron, she would            
become as terrible as him. Galadriel seems to swell in size, showing        
Frodo what she would be like if she possessed the Ring. Then she again      
becomes a simply clad elf-woman. "I pass the test," she tells him.          
"I will diminish and go into the West and remain Galadriel."                
  The travelers now must decide whether they will travel along the          
east side of the river toward Mordor or take the western bank and go        
from there to Minas Tirith, Boromir's city. Boromir reveals that he         
still believes that the Ring should be used against Sauron, and that        
it's folly to take it into Mordor. The decision is postponed when           
Celeborn offers to give them boats, so that they can travel down the        
river many miles before having to choose their course. The elves            
also provide lembas- thin, nourishing cakes- and cloaks that have           
the power of invisibility. Lembas and the waterlike drink of the elves      
that has appeared throughout the book are interpreted as communion          
wafers and holy water by some. But behind the specifically Christian        
symbolism of bread and water is a recognition of the power in such          
basic necessities of life, a recognition shared by many other people        
and religions. Tolkien himself said that he wanted to present things        
in a new light, to give people a sense of wonder at the ordinary. This      
may be the inspiration behind lembas and the miraculous drink of the        
elves, rather than a deliberate allusion to Christianity.                   
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: ELVES IN LORE AND LITERATURE  The word elf seems to have            
originated in Norse mythology and to have been carried over into            
English as another name for fairy. Many people think of elves as            
fairies such as Tinkerbell in Peter Pan or those in Shakespeare's play      
A Midsummer Night's Dream. Tolkien often expressed his dislike for          
these diminutive fairies, who ride insects and live in flowers. His         
elves present a different picture. While they are given to joyous           
feasting, they are also a race of stern warriors. This change               
represents a step backward in time, from modern-day fairy tales and         
the literary fancies of Shakespeare's day to the medieval romances          
that Tolkien's works are often compared to. In these romances               
fairies are beautiful and powerful creatures who are equal in size          
to humans, who can be hostile toward mortals, and who engage in             
hunts and warfare, as Tolkien's elves do.                                   
  These fairies, in turn, represent the dwindled gods of pagan              
mythologies. The Irish fairies, the Daoine Sidhe, are the last of           
the old gods, the Tuatha Da Danaan, who left Ireland for their              
homeland across the sea, Tir Nan Og or The Land of the Young. In The        
Lord of the Rings, the most powerful elves, such as Galadriel, take on      
this godlike stature. Like the Tuatha Da Danaan, the Tolkien elves are      
slowly leaving Middle-earth, passing over the sea to their homeland in      
the Blessed Realm.                                                          
  Many characteristics of the elves in The Lord of the Rings are            
shared by fairies of lore and legend. Like Tolkien's elves, fairies         
are immortal. They're associated with weaving and with the bestowing        
of gifts, such as Galadriel gives to the company. But the Tolkien           
elves differ in one important way.                                          
  Belief in fairies had dwindled along with paganism as the                 
influence of Christianity grew in Europe. Fairies were often                
depicted as amoral and came to represent a way of life opposite to the      
good life of the Christian faith. Tolkien ennobles his elves by             
allying them with the good and making them the most ethical of his          
races.                                                                      
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The company travels down the river until they reach the point at          
which they must choose between Minas Tirith and Mordor. Frodo, as           
Ring-bearer, must decide his course, and the others will follow him or      
not as they choose. Frodo goes off alone to think, and after a time         
Boromir joins him. Boromir, who has been acting strangely, tries to         
convince Frodo to give him the Ring, so that he can use its power           
against the enemy. When Frodo refuses, he tries to take it. Frodo puts      
on the Ring and disappears. As he runs away, he feels the eye of            
Sauron searching for him.                                                   
  In this scene Tolkien shows the relationship between destiny and          
free will. Two voices struggle within Frodo. One is that of Sauron,         
calling Frodo to him. The other tells Frodo to take off the Ring.           
Suddenly realizing that he's free to choose, he takes off the Ring.         
Already he's seen the evil power of the Ring at work in its temptation      
of Boromir. Therefore, he decides to pursue the quest alone. He             
tries to slip away by boat but Sam catches up with him. Together,           
the two hobbits head for Mordor.                                            
                                                                            
LORD|PT_2|BK_3|CH_1_5                                                       
                       PART TWO: THE TWO TOWERS                             
                        BOOK III, CHAPTERS 1-5                              
-                                                                           
  Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli set out to rescue Merry and Pippin,           
who have been captured by orcs (referred to as goblins in The Hobbit).      
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Orcs attack while the rest of the fellowship is still scattered,          
searching for Frodo. Boromir is mortally wounded as he defends Merry        
and Pippin, who are bound and carried away by the orcs. Before he           
dies, Boromir tells Aragorn that he tried to take the Ring from Frodo.      
But instead of criticizing him, Aragorn praises his bravery in              
defending the hobbits. Boromir is given a hero's funeral by Aragorn,        
Legolas, and Gimli. Like Thorin Oakenshield in The Hobbit, Boromir has      
made up for his evil deeds through an act of great valor.                   
  Aragorn faces a dilemma: should he follow Frodo into Mordor, or           
try to save Merry and Pippin? Have you ever had to make a choice            
between doing what you thought you should do, and doing what you            
felt you had to do? This is Aragorn's dilemma. He chooses to follow         
his feelings and try to rescue his friends. (Although Sam and Frodo         
are his friends too, they have chosen to go on alone, and Aragorn           
decides to respect that choice.) Do you think Aragorn made the right        
choice? Why?                                                                
  As Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli follow the trail of the orcs, they         
are heartened at the discovery of hobbit prints and a fallen clasp          
from Pippin's cloak. They meet a troop of horsemen led by Eomer, a          
marshal of Rohan, and learn from him that the orcs they were                
tracking have all been killed by the men of Rohan, but that the             
hobbits weren't seen. Eomer agrees to lend the three companions some        
horses so that they might continue their seemingly hopeless quest.          
  The next two chapters return to the scene when Merry and Pippin were      
captured by the orcs. The orcs are actually from three different            
places and constantly fight among themselves. It is characteristic          
of Tolkien's evil creatures that they cannot cooperate. The orcs            
from the mines of Moria in the Misty Mountains are seeking                  
vengeance. Sauron's orcs want to take the hobbits back to Mordor.           
The strongest band, Saruman's orcs, have orders to take the hobbits to      
their master in Isengard. Fortunately, the orcs are intercepted by the      
men of Rohan, and during the ensuing battle Merry and Pippin manage to      
slip away. They hide in the forest of Fangorn, where they meet              
Treebeard, an Ent.                                                          
  Ents are another of Tolkien's creations that have captured the            
imagination of readers. Like Tom Bombadil, they are part of the             
natural world and show the power of nature. They are shepherds of           
trees and look like trees themselves. Their chief is Treebeard. Some        
people call him Fangorn, which is also the name of the forest. He is        
very ancient, the oldest living thing still to walk the earth. When         
Merry and Pippin tell him their story, Treebeard realizes that Saruman      
is trying to make himself into a rival power to Sauron. Treebeard           
decides that Saruman must be stopped, but not because of the danger he      
poses to the people of Gondor and Rohan. (Nor does Treebeard take           
sides in the battle against Sauron. This is consistent with the idea        
that nature is neutral in the struggle between good and evil.) He           
bases his decision on the fact that Saruman's orcs have been cutting        
down trees on the edge of Fangorn, leaving the land desolate. (This         
wanton destruction of nature is an important sign of evil in Tolkien's      
world.)                                                                     
  The Ents, like the forces of good, believe in the importance of free      
will. They're very independent and can't be forced to do something          
they don't want to do. Treebeard can only lead by convincing them he        
is right. After a lengthy council meeting, they decide to march on          
Isengard, to stop Saruman.                                                  
  The story at this point returns to Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli. In        
the forest they meet Gandalf, who tells them that Merry and Pippin are      
in safe hands. They learn from the wizard how he fought with the            
Balrog after his fall and at last overcame him. Gandalf passed through      
fire and death and emerged renewed. He is no longer Gandalf the             
Grey, but Gandalf the White, taking Saruman's place.                        
  Gandalf points out that there is a purpose at work in the world.          
If Merry and Pippin hadn't come on the quest, they would not have been      
there for Boromir to protect. Their presence saved Boromir by giving        
him an opportunity for redemption through sacrificing himself for           
the sake of others. Gandalf also points out how the work of evil can        
be turned to good purpose: The orcs' capture of Merry and Pippin            
resulted in the arrival of the hobbits in Fangorn Forest just in            
time to arouse the Ents against Saruman.                                    
                                                                            
LORD|PT_2|BK_3|CH_6_11                                                      
                       BOOK III, CHAPTERS 6-11                              
-                                                                           
  Satisfied that Merry and Pippin are safe, Aragorn, Legolas, and           
Gimli join the men of Rohan in battle against the evil wizard Saruman.      
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli now ride with Gandalf to Edoras, the          
palace of Theoden, king of Rohan.                                           
5}                                                                          
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: Rohan is also called the Mark of Rohan and the Riddermark, and      
the Riders of Rohan are sometimes referred to as the Rohirrim and           
the Riders of the Mark. They are warriors, and Gandalf says of them         
that they are unlearned but wise. Many readers have commented on their      
similarity to the Anglo-Saxons, the ancestors of the English. The most      
important difference between the men of Rohan and the Anglo-Saxons          
is that the Anglo-Saxons didn't have the Rohirrims' love for horses.        
Other than that, the two cultures are very similar. The language of         
Rohan is based on Anglo-Saxon. The song of Rohan that Aragorn sings in      
chapter 6 is modeled after a famous Anglo-Saxon poem, The Wanderer.         
This poem talks about how fleeting life is and how with time all            
traces of a man's life are erased. The Anglo-Saxons reacted to this         
awareness- as did the ancient Greeks in The Iliad and The Odyssey-          
by seeking glory so that their names would be remembered in song.           
The men of Rohan also show this awareness of death and desire for           
glory. And because they accept death as inevitable, they also accept        
the idea that it's not whether you win or lose that matters, but            
whether you act rightly. Thus, in their view, it's better to choose         
a noble death than to survive and compromise yourself. The courage          
of the Riders is an illustration of Tolkien's theme of heroism.             
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Gandalf and the others are at first met with suspicion in Edoras. At      
one point an argument breaks out when Aragorn refuses to leave his          
sword outside the king's hall. Gandalf gently reminds him that they're      
all friends- or at least should be; only Mordor will benefit if they        
quarrel. Aragorn reluctantly leaves his sword. In doing so, he's            
learned that sometimes he must swallow his pride in the interest of         
peace.                                                                      
  After Gandalf frees Theoden from the influence of his evil                
councilor, Grima the Wormtongue, the king agrees to do battle with          
Saruman. In Grima, a spy for Saruman, you can see Tolkien's ideas           
about evil. You are told that Grima wasn't always evil but was              
corrupted by Saruman. Given the opportunity to redeem himself, he           
refuses, but even so is treated with mercy. To kill or imprison him         
would itself be evil, and so could bring forth no good.                     
  Notice the style of the writing. The sentence structure, or               
syntax, is very formal, as in "Never again shall it be said,                
Gandalf, that you come only with grief." Tolkien also uses                  
old-fashioned words, such as hearken and behold, to help establish the      
mood and to add the flavor of ancient epics.                                
  For the first time Aragorn meets Eowyn, Theoden's niece. She is very      
beautiful, but also appears to Aragorn to be cold, not yet come to          
womanhood. Eowyn sees in him a man of great power and seems to be           
falling in love with him. He reacts by acting troubled. As the army         
rides out, Eowyn stays behind to watch over her people. She wears mail      
and carries a sword like a warrior. Keep all of this in mind, for           
Eowyn will later play an important role in the story.                       
  Theoden's army appears to have ridden to certain defeat. They hold        
the great fortress of Helm's Deep against Saruman's forces, but             
can't resist the foes' onslaughts much longer. Rather than give in          
to despair, Theoden and his men ride out in a last desperate attack.        
But the tide of battle is reversed when Gandalf arrives with                
reinforcements, and the orcs are driven into a mysterious and               
frightening forest that has appeared overnight around Helm's Deep.          
As the victorious forces set out for Isengard, Saruman's stronghold,        
they learn from Gandalf that the army of trees has been led here by         
the Ents.                                                                   
  At Isengard, the king and his company find Merry and Pippin relaxing      
in front of the shattered gates. The hobbits tell how the Ents, led by      
Treebeard, attacked Isengard and overthrew Saruman.                         
  Gandalf speaks with Saruman, who is holed up in the tower of Orthanc      
with the traitor Grima. Gandalf offers Saruman an opportunity to            
repent and join the side of good, but Saruman scornfully refuses.           
Gandalf then breaks Saruman's staff, casting him out of the order of        
wizards and out of the White Council. Now a weak, pitiable figure,          
Saruman is sentenced to be kept prisoner in his tower, guarded by           
the Ents.                                                                   
  At the same moment that Gandalf breaks Saruman's staff, Grima             
angrily throws a heavy round stone at Gandalf but misses him. It is         
a palantir, a stone of seeing, perhaps the greatest treasure that           
Saruman had. Once again, evil intent has a good effect, for the             
stone is very valuable.                                                     
  Pippin is drawn to the stone and sneaks a look into it later that         
night. Sauron appears in a vision and questions him, believing that         
Pippin is Saruman's prisoner. Sauron calls Pippin "it" and speaks of        
him as a dainty morsel, an object rather than an individual. It was         
amusing in The Hobbit when Gollum called Bilbo "it." But now this           
peculiarity of speech takes on evil significance. It shows Sauron's         
possessiveness and his denial of the individuality and free will of         
others.                                                                     
  Galfand presents the palantir to Aragorn, to whom it belongs as           
rightful heir to the throne of Gondor. As they speak, a Nazgul, one of      
the ringwraiths, passes overhead on his winged steed. It is a sign          
that war will come soon. Taking Pippin with him, Gandalf rides at once      
for Gondor, which will be the first country to be attacked.                 
                                                                            
LORD|PT_2|BK_4|CH_1_5                                                       
                        BOOK IV, CHAPTERS 1-5                               
-                                                                           
  Frodo and Sam begin the tortuous journey to Mordor, guided by             
Gollum. They meet Faramir, a captain of Gondor's army, who is               
stationed just outside Mordor.                                              
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  On their journey to Mordor, Frodo and Sam capture Gollum, who has         
been following them since the company passed through the mines of           
Moria. Frodo remembers his conversation with Gandalf long ago, when he      
told the wizard that Bilbo should have killed Gollum. But now that          
Frodo has the opportunity, he doesn't kill Gollum either. Why not?          
  There's a change in Gollum's voice and language when he seems to          
relive for a moment the torment he endured in Mordor, and laments           
the loss of his precious Ring. This is the first glimpse Tolkien gives      
you of another side of Gollum's personality. He reveals a soul in           
torment, struggling with itself. But the evil self is still                 
stronger, and Gollum reverts to his usual manner of speaking.               
  Frodo makes Gollum swear to obey him and to lead them into Mordor.        
As if in a vision, Sam sees a physical change in Frodo, who appears         
for a moment like a mighty lord, with Gollum a whining dog at his           
feet. After swearing to obey Frodo, Gollum now starts speaking              
normally again, and calls himself Smeagol, the name he had before he        
found the Ring. Although he acts fearful, he's also pitifully eager to      
please and appears insanely happy whenever Frodo is kind to him.            
What do you think has caused this change in him? If you pay close           
attention to Gollum's speech in the next few chapters, you will find        
that it gives clues to the struggle going on inside him.                    
  Gollum guides the hobbits through the Dead Marshes. They travel in        
darkness, and all around them they see what seem to be candles              
burning. The marsh is the scene of an ancient battle, and in the water      
the hobbits glimpse the faces of the long dead, both good folks and         
evil. The lights are actually based on fact; they are caused by gasses      
that escape the rotting muck of the marsh floor and spontaneously           
ignite. In folktales they are called candles of the dead or                 
will-o'-the-wisps and are believed to lead travelers astray. Tolkien        
uses this folk belief to create a nightmarish landscape.                    
  They next pass through another nightmarish landscape, worse than the      
marshes. The land around Mordor is desolate. Saruman's crime of             
cutting down trees pales next to what Sauron has done. Tolkien's            
descriptions are powerful: "The gasping pools were choked with ash and      
crawling muds, sickly white and grey, as if the mountains had               
vomited the filth of their entrails upon the lands." Nothing lives          
there, "not even the leprous growths that feed on rottenness." This is      
a land that has been defiled beyond healing, and it shows not only the      
depth of Sauron's power but also the depth of his evil.                     
  Tolkien's description of the desolation outside Mordor is                 
reminiscent of modern wastelands caused by industries and strip             
mining: it is filled with mounds of poison-stained earth, gaping pits,      
and noxious fumes. Many readers believe that Tolkien is                     
intentionally making a comment on the destruction of nature by              
technology. Remember that The Lord of the Rings was written more            
than thirty years ago. Seeing all the attention that the harmful            
effects of industry and pollution are now getting, we can                   
acknowledge that Tolkien was ahead of his time.                             
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: WASTELANDS IN LITERATURE  Wastelands are often used in              
literature as a symbol of spiritual barrenness. Two good examples of        
this occur in F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby (1925) and T.          
S. Eliot's famous poem, The Waste Land (1997). In The Great Gatsby,         
Nick, the narrator, passes through a wasteland of ashes on his way          
into New York City. In T. S. Eliot's poem there is no wasteland except      
in the title, which serves as a metaphor for the lives described in         
the poem. In both, the wasteland is interpreted as a symbol for the         
sterility of modern life: the ugliness of the city, the lack of caring      
relationships, and the lack of any sense of purpose. It's likely            
that Tolkien was aware of this tradition and either consciously or          
unconsciously drew on it when he described the wastes around Mordor.        
How does the wasteland as a symbol of inner barrenness relate to            
Tolkien's concept of evil?                                                  
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Meanwhile, the struggle between the two sides of Gollum's                 
personality continues. One day, while Sam is pretending to sleep, he        
overhears Gollum debating with himself. As Smeagol, he wants to keep        
his promise to Frodo; as Gollum, he wants to take the Ring for              
himself. The Gollum side decides to wait for the aid of a mysterious        
"She." This idea terrifies the Smeagol personality.                         
  Frodo had originally intended to try to find a way in through the         
Black Gate of Mordor. It seems to be an impossible feat. But he             
resolves to attempt it, because his task is to go into Mordor and he        
knows of no other way. (If you look at the map in the book, you will        
see that Mordor is surrounded by mountains on all but the eastern           
border, which is furthest from the Black Gate.) Sam is dismayed, but        
loyally resolves to follow his master anywhere.                             
  Gollum is wild with fear. He's all too familiar with Sauron's             
power and what it would mean for Sauron to regain possession of the         
Ring. "He'll eat us all, if He gets it, eat all the world." This is         
consistent with the possessiveness of evil; Sauron devours everything,      
making it no longer something free and independent, but a part of           
himself.                                                                    
  Originally Gollum was only going to guide Sam and Frodo to the            
edge of Mordor and then be set free. But now he offers to take the          
hobbits into Mordor, through a secret passage he discovered when he         
escaped from Sauron. Frodo decides to trust him once again.                 
  Gollum leads the hobbits into Ithilien, which lies along the              
mountains that form the western border of Mordor. Ithilien is a             
beautiful land, full of forests and streams. Not too long ago it was        
part of Gondor, which lies just across the river. But now Ithilien          
is held by Sauron's forces, and their presence is revealed by felled        
trees, pits of stinking refuse, and the eye of Sauron carved into           
stones and trees.                                                           
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: FRODO AS A SAINT  Frodo's quest can be interpreted as               
spiritual. While he journeys toward Mordor, the stronghold of evil, he      
must struggle with the evil within himself, as symbolized by the            
Ring and the temptation to use it. By taking on the quest to destroy        
the Ring, Frodo is sacrificing his own desires to save the rest of the      
world. And through his sufferings, he's transformed. Sam notices            
this change in Frodo. While Frodo is sleeping, Sam sees a light             
shining within him. Frodo's face looks peaceful, very ancient, but          
also beautiful. This serenity and inner light is often used to              
characterize saints.                                                        
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The hobbits find themselves in the midst of a battle between some         
men of Gondor and an army of Southrons, men from the south who have         
come to join forces with the evil Sauron. Tolkien takes this                
opportunity to make a point about the tragedy of war. One of the            
Southrons falls dead near Sam. In a sudden moment of insight, Sam           
wonders about the man's name and whether he fought only because he had      
been deceived or threatened by his leaders. Maybe, Sam reflects, he         
would have preferred to stay home and live in peace. Is Tolkien             
hinting that the common men in the enemy's armies really aren't all         
that different from those who fight on the side of good?                    
  When the battle ends, the hobbits meet Faramir, who is captain of         
the Gondor army and also Boromir's brother. Compare this meeting            
with the one between Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli, and Eomer, captain        
of a group of Riders of Rohan. Eomer was under orders to detain all         
strangers; Faramir is ordered to kill them. But like Eomer, Faramir         
tempers orders with his own judgment. Neither of them is likely to          
give the excuse that he was only following orders if he should ever do      
something wrong, just as so many Nazis pleaded after World War II.          
Here, Tolkien introduces another aspect of free will: you must be           
willing to accept responsibility for your own actions and not               
blindly follow another's orders if you think they're wrong.                 
  Faramir also serves as a contrast to his brother. Unlike Boromir,         
Faramir does not love war; his only purpose in fighting is to               
protect the home he loves. Also, unlike the proud Boromir, Faramir          
is not tempted to take the Ring. He's wise enough to know that              
Sauron's evil power can't be used to bring about good.                      
                                                                            
LORD|PT_2|BK_4|CH_6_10                                                      
                        BOOK IV, CHAPTERS 6-10                              
-                                                                           
  With misgivings, Faramir allows the hobbits to continue their quest.      
Gollum guides Frodo and Sam into Mordor, betraying them there.              
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Gollum is captured by the men of Gondor and would have been               
killed, except for Frodo's intervention. Frodo at this point has            
come a long way from Bag End. He now accepts responsibility for             
others, taking Gollum under his protection to save his life. He also        
speaks with Faramir- as with an equal, showing his rise in status.          
Tolkien even compares Frodo to Aragorn: When Gollum balks at being          
blindfolded, Frodo says that all three of them will be blindfolded,         
just as Aragorn insisted in Lorien when Gimli the dwarf was unfairly        
singled out for similar treatment.                                          
  Against Faramir's advice, the hobbits follow Gollum past Minas            
Morgul, once a stronghold of good, but now held by Sauron. From             
there they climb a long series of stairs that leads to a secret             
passage over the mountains and into Mordor.                                 
  An important incident occurs before they enter the secret tunnel.         
Gollum returns from his wanderings to find Frodo and Sam sleeping           
peacefully. He is debating with himself, and Smeagol, his good side,        
seems to be winning. He gives Frodo a touch that is almost a caress;        
for a moment, he himself looks like an old weary hobbit- "starved,          
pitiable." But when Sam awakens and accuses him of sneaking, the            
moment is past and Gollum reverts to his evil self. Here you see why        
some people consider Gollum such a tragic character: when it seems          
possible he might be reformed by the goodness of others, a moment of        
misunderstanding ruins everything.                                          
  Gollum now leads the hobbits into a trap. The tunnel they must            
take is the lair of Shelob, a monstrous spiderlike creature, the            
mother of the spiders that attacked Bilbo and the dwarves in The            
Hobbit. As Shelob advances on her prey, Sam has a sudden vision of          
Galadriel and the phial of starlight she gave Frodo. Frodo holds out        
the phial, and as his hope increases so does the light, until it seems      
to be a brilliant flame in his hand. Frodo calls out some elvish            
words, but it's as if another voice is speaking through him. Some           
readers interpret these things- Sam's vision, the light of the              
phial, and Frodo's words of power- as the emergence of some inner           
resource that the hobbits had previously been unaware of. Others see        
it as a sign that Sam and Frodo are not alone, but are being aided          
by some power that works through them. Before the blaze of the phial        
and the threat of Frodo's sword, Shelob backs away, and the hobbits         
flee out the other end of the tunnel, into Mordor.                          
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: SHELOB, THE PERSONIFICATION OF GREED  When Gollum said that         
Sauron would eat the whole world, he was speaking figuratively.             
Shelob, on the other hand, desires literally to eat all living things.      
She personifies greed, showing in a horrifying way its                      
destructiveness. Sauron's ambition is to make all other wills into          
an extension of his own. Shelob's ambition is to destroy not only           
will, but life, so that in all the world she's the only creature            
left alive.                                                                 
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Sam and Frodo haven't escaped Shelob yet. She emerges from her            
tunnel and attacks Frodo. With great courage and the help of                
Galadriel's phial, Sam manages to drive Shelob back into her tunnel.        
But when he returns to his master, he finds Frodo lying pale and            
lifeless from Shelob's sting. Believing that Frodo is dead, Sam             
takes the Ring and leaves, intending to carry on the quest- the             
destruction of the Ring- himself. The Ring is a physical burden,            
bowing Sam's head down to the ground. Remember that Tolkien often           
manipulates the physical characteristics of things to signify               
something different about them- for example, Gollum's momentary change      
into an old, tired hobbit to signify that his gentler personality,          
Smeagol, was in control. What do you think is the significance of           
the weight of the Ring and Sam's ability to bear it?                        
  Just then, Sam hears the voices of orcs and follows them. The orcs        
discover Frodo's body and carry it back to their tower. Sam realizes        
that his love for Frodo is greater than any sense of duty, and he runs      
after the orcs to die defending his master. How would you characterize      
Sam's act? Is it noble or foolish? How do his actions relate to             
Tolkien's theme of the importance of friendship?                            
  As Sam follows the orcs, he overhears their two leaders talking           
and learns that Frodo isn't dead, but only paralyzed. He calls himself      
a fool; he knew in his heart that Frodo was alive, but didn't               
listen. Brandishing Sting, he chases after the orcs. But the great          
gates of the fortress clang shut behind the orcs, locking Sam out.          
                                                                            
LORD|PT_3|BK_5|CH_1_5                                                       
                  PART THREE: THE RETURN OF THE KING                        
                         BOOK V, CHAPTERS 1-5                               
-                                                                           
  Sauron's army begins its siege of Minas Tirith, the capital of            
Gondor.                                                                     
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  Gandalf and Pippin arrive in Minas Tirith amid preparations for war.      
They meet with Denethor, Boromir's father, the steward of Gondor.           
Pippin offers his allegiance to Denethor, and the steward accepts.          
What moves Pippin to do this?                                               
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: Minas Tirith is the capital of Gondor, one of the ancient           
kingdoms of the Numenoreans, a noble and long-lived race of men. The        
last king of Gondor disappeared in a previous encounter with evil, and      
since then a series of stewards have ruled, safeguarding the throne         
until a king should appear. This is the throne that Aragorn is heir         
to.                                                                         
  Just as some readers compare the men of Rohan to the Anglo-Saxons,        
they compare Gondor to such ancient kingdoms as Rome or Greece. Like a      
Roman city, Minas Tirith is immense and beautiful. The hall of the          
king is imposing, and the steward is a subtle and learned man, wise in      
the ways of politics. Next to him, King Theoden seems like just a           
kindly old man. But there is also a sense of barrenness here: the dead      
tree in the courtyard, the cold granite of the great hall, and the          
steward himself, who shows no trace of human warmth. Compare this to        
the description of Theoden's hall, Meduseld, with its hanging               
tapestries and many-colored, richly carved pillars. Look for further        
contrast between Gondor and Rohan, and try to determine what Tolkien        
is saying about the two cultures.                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The story now returns to the point when Gandalf and Pippin left           
the others, a day's journey out of Isengard. Aragorn, Merry,                
Legolas, and Gimli remain with the king and his company. As they            
make ready to depart, a company of riders appear. They are Rangers          
from the north, like Aragorn, and have come to help him. That night,        
Merry swears fealty to King Theoden. How does this differ from the          
scene where Pippin swears fealty to Denethor?                               
  Aragorn now takes a fateful step, for the first time going against        
Gandalf's advice. At the end of Book III, Gandalf had warned him            
against using the palantir, saying that it was not yet time to              
reveal themselves to Sauron. Aragorn now judges for himself that the        
time has come and that he has the strength to face Sauron. He wrests        
the stone from Sauron and reveals himself as the heir to Gondor's           
throne. This strikes fear into Sauron's heart. Aragorn hopes also that      
it will move Sauron to a hasty attack, which will be ill-timed and          
unprepared. The palantir shows Aragorn an unforeseen danger                 
approaching Gondor from the south, which only Aragorn can act to            
avert. With new resolve, Aragorn decides to take the Paths of the           
Dead, caverns that lead right through the mountains, and that are           
haunted by spirits of the dead.                                             
  This is an important point in Aragorn's life. He steps out from           
under Gandalf's wing, making two crucial decisions without                  
consulting others: he uses the palantir, and he accepts his destiny         
that he must travel the Paths of the Dead. Both are supreme tests of        
his power. He has passed one, and it remains to be seen if he'll            
pass the other. If he fails, he stands to lose everything, including        
the throne of Gondor and his love, Arwen.                                   
  The way to the Paths of the Dead passes through Dunharrow, a place        
of safety where Theoden's people, led by Eowyn, have taken refuge.          
When Eowyn learns of Aragorn's plan, she is fearful and tries to            
talk him out of it. When she sees he won't be swayed, she asks to go        
with him, but Aragorn refuses. If you read their conversation closely,      
you will see that there is a lot being said between the lines. When         
Aragorn tells Eowyn that his heart dwells in Rivendell, he's referring      
to his love for Arwen. Do you think Eowyn understands that he loves         
another? When she says that the Rangers follow him through the Paths        
of the Dead only because they love him and won't be parted from him,        
she's declaring her love for Aragorn- she doesn't want to be parted         
from him either.                                                            
  Notice the formal speech used here. Eowyn calls Aragorn "thee" and        
Aragorn calls her "lady." The formal words underscore the fact that         
they are speaking with great restraint. By its sharp contrast with          
what the two are feeling, the formal speech also heightens the sense        
of suppressed emotion boiling beneath the surface.                          
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: As mentioned earlier, some readers criticize Tolkien for            
ignoring women in his work, or for only idealizing them in such             
beautiful but unreachable characters as Arwen and Galadriel. But in         
Eowyn, Tolkien presents a woman who is all too human, someone whom          
female readers of his book can identify with. She suffers from              
unrequited love for Aragorn. She also suffers from the restricted role      
women have to play. Eowyn says she fears nothing but being caged:           
"To stay behind bars, until use and old age accept them, and all            
chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire."               
Through his sympathetic portrayal of Eowyn, Tolkien here expresses his      
awareness of the needs and desires of women, even though he may             
neglect them through most of the book.                                      
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Legolas and Gimli travel with Aragorn and the Rangers through the         
Paths of the Dead. This area is haunted by the spirits of men who           
had broken their oath to fight against Sauron in the last war. Aragorn      
calls on the dead to fulfill their oath now and win peace for               
themselves. In his ability to command the dead, Aragorn proves his          
power and his claim to the throne, for only Isildur's heir could            
hold the dead to their oath. Ironically, here he becomes a king of          
sorts: the townspeople flee before him and his company, calling him         
the King of the Dead.                                                       
  King Theoden arrives in Dunharrow soon after Aragorn's departure. He      
immediately prepares to ride with his army to Minas Tirith, to help         
defend that city against Sauron. Merry is dejected to learn he'll be        
left behind. But a young Rider named Dernhelm helps the hobbit.             
Earlier in the day Merry had noticed the warrior looking at him. The        
hobbit had seen in Dernhelm's face the hopelessness of someone who          
yearns solely for death. Now Dernhelm whispers in his ear, "Where will      
wants not, a way opens"- a rephrasing of the old proverb "Where             
there's a will, there's a way." Merry rides to war hidden under             
Dernhelm's cloak. Remember Dernhelm's words and desire for death,           
because they will have greater significance later.                          
  Meanwhile, in Minas Tirith, Faramir has arrived from Ithilien and         
tells his father, Denethor, of the meeting with Frodo. For the first        
time Denethor learns of the quest to destroy the Ring. He thinks the        
quest is doomed to failure and is angry with Faramir for not                
bringing him the Ring. His other son, Boromir, he says, would have          
done so. With angry words, Denethor sends his son to the                    
battlefront, wishing Faramir had died instead of Boromir.                   
  Later, when Faramir is seriously wounded by the captain of the            
ringwraiths, Denethor remorsefully realizes that he also loves              
Faramir. The old man falls into despair; with Faramir's death the line      
of stewards will end. Believing that Sauron will triumph, Denethor          
sees no reason to go on fighting. He resolves to commit suicide by          
burning Faramir and himself on a funeral pyre.                              
                                                                            
LORD|PT_3|BK_5|CH_6_10                                                      
                        BOOK V, CHAPTERS 6-10                               
-                                                                           
  The arrival of the Riders of Rohan turns the tide of battle. After        
Minas Tirith is saved, Aragorn leads the armies to the very gates of        
Mordor, where they are surrounded by Sauron's forces.                       
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  At that moment, when all seems lost, the men of Rohan arrive and          
join the battle. The captain of the ringwraiths, mounted on his winged      
steed, flies over the battlefield, striking despair into the hearts of      
men. But unlike Denethor, Theoden refuses to succumb to despair. He         
calls to his men, "Fear no darkness!" Perhaps having already                
overcome the despair induced by Grima the Wormtongue, Theoden is now        
immune to it.                                                               
  Theoden's horse is struck by a dart from the captain of the               
ringwraiths and falls on its master. As the wraith swoops down for the      
kill, he is challenged by Dernhelm, now revealed as Eowyn. With             
Merry's help, she kills the ringwraith. In this way another prophecy        
is fulfilled, that the ringwraith would not die at the hand of any          
man.                                                                        
  Merry's sword proves to carry unthought-of significance. It was made      
long ago to be used against the Witch-lord of Angmar, the leader of         
the ringwraiths. The man who made the sword went to defeat and              
death. But his efforts were not entirely fruitless, because Merry           
found the sword in the barrow and carried it all the way to Minas           
Tirith. Only this sword could have harmed the ringwraith. Through           
details such as this, Tolkien shows the workings of a greater purpose,      
one that men cannot follow, because it works too slowly, taking             
unknown years to bear fruit. Tolkien's message seems to be that even        
though something you have done may appear futile at the time, in years      
to come it may prove to be of great importance.                             
  While Eowyn faces the ringwraith, Gandalf is inside the city, saving      
Faramir from his father's madness. But Denethor, in his pride and           
despair, cannot be stopped from killing himself. Denethor gives             
several reasons for wanting to die. He believes that Sauron will win        
the war. But he also knows that Aragorn is coming to claim his throne,      
and Denethor will have to relinquish his power. Since he cannot have        
things as he wants them, the steward would rather die than serve            
another. Compare Denethor's death with Theoden's. One gives in to           
despair, the other dies resisting it.                                       
  Like Saruman, Denethor had a palantir, which he used to watch the         
growing strength of Sauron. Denethor believed that he controlled the        
palantir, but Sauron actually controlled it and presented a                 
distorted picture to the steward, one intended to induce despair.           
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: DESPAIR AS THE WEAPON OF EVIL  When Denethor falls into             
despair, he brings about the deaths of others as well as himself. If        
not for Denethor, Gandalf would have been in the battlefield and            
possibly could have prevented Theoden's death and the wounding of           
Eowyn and Merry. Gandalf says that this is the working of Sauron.           
The ringwraiths also use despair as a weapon. Few men can resist the        
power of their cries, which make men cower in despair and stop              
fighting. Despair, then, causes people to abandon their roles in the        
grand design, and to fail to do their allotted tasks. In this way evil      
prevails.                                                                   
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  For now, the battle is over, but Faramir, Eowyn, and Merry all lie        
in the Houses of Healing. Seemingly nothing can cure them, until            
Aragorn arrives and calls them back from their dreaming. There is a         
saying in Gondor that the hands of a king are the hands of the healer,      
and now it is whispered that a king has come. But Aragorn slips away        
without claiming his throne. Remember when Aragorn refused to leave         
his sword outside King Theoden's hall? You can see now how he has           
changed. Then he placed his pride above peace, until Gandalf rebuked        
him. Now, he humbles himself rather than stir up controversy by his         
claim to kingship. For the moment it's more important to have a united      
front against Mordor.                                                       
  Meanwhile, Gandalf counsels the armies to march to Mordor itself,         
not with hope of victory, but only to draw Sauron's attention, so that      
Frodo, the Ringbearer, may pass through the enemy lands unnoticed.          
If Frodo fails, they shall all die or be enslaved. Even if Frodo            
succeeds, they may still die. The importance of Frodo's task also           
places the heroic deeds of the warriors in true perspective. For all        
their courage and losses, their battles have been only a                    
distraction. The real battle lies with the two hobbits, Frodo and Sam,      
who struggle alone through Mordor. With them alone lies victory or          
defeat. It's the moral battle, not the physical one, that determines        
the fate of the world.                                                      
  Aragorn again shows his wisdom as a leader. As the armies approach        
Mordor, there are many who cannot face the horror of that land.             
Instead of calling them cowards, Aragorn gives them an opportunity          
to fight with honor, sending them instead to retake the fortress of         
Cair Andros. Although difficult, this is a task they can face, even if      
they should die, and so he saves them from giving in to despair.            
  At the Black Gate of Mordor the heralds call on Sauron to surrender.      
In answer, an envoy called the Mouth of Sauron emerges from the gates.      
In this character you can see Tolkien's theme that evil destroys            
free will and identity. The Mouth of Sauron has forgotten his name and      
now exists only to serve his master's will. He holds out Sam's              
sword, an elven cloak, and Frodo's coat of mail. He offers a                
bargain: Frodo will be released if they swear peace with Sauron.            
Gandalf rejects those terms. Why? And why should Sauron even bother to      
bargain when the odds are overwhelmingly in his favor? Why is it            
important to him that they submit?                                          
  Seemingly, all hope is gone. As the Black Gate swings open, Sauron's      
mighty army descends on the small force. The arrival of the eagles          
as Book V ends may be a sign of hope, but will they alone be able to        
turn the tide of battle?                                                    
                                                                            
LORD|PT_3|BK_6|CH_1_5                                                       
                        BOOK VI, CHAPTERS 1-5                               
-                                                                           
  The story returns to Sam and Frodo, who at last succeed in                
destroying the Ring. Sauron is defeated, and amidst great rejoicing,        
Aragorn is crowned king of Gondor.                                          
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  As Sam stands outside the tower of Cirith Ungol, wondering how he         
will rescue Frodo, he is tempted by power of the Ring. But his love         
for Frodo and his simple hobbit-sense save him. He has no desire to         
rule the world, but wants only to tend his own patch of land. Sam           
passes the test, and like Galadriel, he diminishes from the powerful        
figure that the Ring makes him seem, and becomes only himself, a small      
frightened hobbit.                                                          
  Sam hears the sounds of fighting in the tower. This fighting reveals      
the weakness of evil; the orcs cannot cooperate and are killing each        
other in petty arguments. Finally, only two orcs are left alive.            
Driving them off, Sam rescues Frodo, and the two have a tender              
reunion. But a terrible change comes over Frodo when Sam hands him          
back the Ring. Grabbing the Ring, Frodo calls Sam a thief. Before           
his eyes, Sam seems to have suddenly turned into a greedy orc. But the      
negative effect on Frodo of the Ring's evil power quickly passes.           
  Dressed in orc uniforms, Sam and Frodo leave the fortress to begin        
the last stage of their journey. The land of Mordor is a dark,              
desolate place, with no living things but some twisted brambles.            
Even here, however, a star is visible in the sky. The symbolism of          
star and shadow is carried to its logical conclusion. A shadow may          
obscure the stars for a while, but the stars will always be shining         
far above, out of the reach of darkness. Is Tolkien saying that good        
can never be overcome by evil, but will always triumph in the end?          
  Caught between the pull of the Ring and the pressure of Sauron's          
will, Frodo is so weary he can hardly walk. He and Sam discard              
everything they don't need. Symbolically, they seem to be stripping         
themselves to the core of their humanity: the indomitable will to           
carry on to the end. Sam is the leader at this point. He cares for          
Frodo, leading him onward and even carrying him when Frodo's                
strength fails. It is Sam's memory of the Shire that gives him the          
will to go on in the face of the horror of Mordor.                          
  As they creep up the slopes of Mount Doom, they are attacked by           
Gollum. Sam deals with Gollum while Frodo struggles on alone. Sam is        
tempted to kill the miserable creature, but spares him, as Bilbo and        
Frodo did before him. Having borne the Ring even a little while, he         
understands and pities Gollum's agony.                                      
  Sam follows after Frodo and finds him standing before the Crack of        
Doom. There, Frodo's will fails, and he claims the Ring for himself.        
But Gollum struggles with him, biting off the finger with the Ring          
and, still gloating, accidentally falls into the fiery abyss. With the      
destruction of the Ring, Sauron is vanquished forever: his armies           
are scattered or destroyed, and his towers crumble. Sam and Frodo           
are rescued from the destruction by the eagles, and the two hobbits         
are welcomed with great praise by the victorious army. This is the          
climax of the book, where the two halves of the story, the war and the      
quest, meet in victory. The rest of the book serves as a gradual            
winding down from this climax, as Tolkien ties up loose ends.               
  The destruction of Sauron coincides with the beginning of spring,         
which has long symbolized spiritual renewal. Tolkien makes many             
references to renewal and to the end of barrenness. Frodo himself, now      
free of the Ring, seems to have recovered his old sense of gaiety.          
An eagle announces Sauron's fall to the people of Minas Tirith with         
a song that sounds almost like a Christian psalm referring to the           
resurrection of Christ. Eowyn experiences a rebirth of sorts, when she      
falls in love with Faramir. She no longer desires death or glory in         
battle. Instead she wants to be a healer "and love all things that          
grow and are not barren." As a final symbol of the end of                   
barrenness, Aragorn finds a sapling to replace the white tree of            
Gondor that had stood withered in the courtyard for so long.                
  This is a time of triumph for Aragorn. He is crowned king of              
Gondor and marries Arwen, Elrond's daughter. But there is an element        
of tragedy mixed in with his joy. To marry him, Arwen has had to            
give up immortality. She is now doomed to die and so is forever             
separated from her father and her brothers, who will pass over to           
the Blessed Realm and live there. Besides this personal loss,               
Aragorn also feels the loss of many beautiful things, such as               
Lorien, which will pass with the destruction of the Ring. This mixture      
of tragedy with joy is characteristic of Tolkien.                           
                                                                            
LORD|PT_3|BK_6|CH_6_9                                                       
                        BOOK VI, CHAPTERS 6-9                               
-                                                                           
  The hobbits return to the Shire, where they find that evil has            
been at work in their absence. The Shire is saved, but Frodo never          
recovers from his many wounds.                                              
-                                                                           
                                  *                                         
-                                                                           
  The four hobbits, accompanied by Gandalf, now depart for home. After      
stopping in Rivendell to visit Bilbo, they arrive in Bree, where there      
has been trouble with ruffians from the south. The travelers learn          
that things are not well in the Shire either. Gandalf seems to know         
more about the trouble than he lets on. The hobbits assume he will set      
things right, but Gandalf tells them he isn't going to the Shire.           
His time of helping out is over, and they're quite capable of doing it      
themselves. In fact, he tells them, this is what they were trained          
for. What do you think he means by that remark?                             
  The hobbits continue on to the Shire and find that Saruman and his        
men have taken over and are tearing down buildings and cutting              
trees. Now you can see most clearly how their journeys have changed         
the four friends. They are not intimidated, but set out with                
determination to rouse the inhabitants of the Shire to throw out            
Saruman's ruffians. Frodo, however, refuses to fight. He has learned        
that no one has the right to take the life of another, no matter how        
just that death may seem. He extends his sympathy to all- the good,         
the evil, and the misguided- because he knows that no one started           
out evil and that those who do fall into evil suffer the most of            
all. Saruman himself appears as a pitiable figure, and even his             
attempt to kill Frodo doesn't change Frodo's resolve to let him go          
free.                                                                       
  Grima the Wormtongue is still with Saruman. Like Gollum, he has been      
deformed by evil and now crawls after Saruman like a dog. Frodo offers      
him a chance to turn away from Saruman. Grima seems to feel a touch of      
hope, but Saruman destroys it by telling the others about Grima's evil      
deeds. Grima turns on his master and kills him, only to be killed           
himself by the overzealous hobbits.                                         
  Sam uses Galadriel's gift, a box of soil from Lorien, to restore the      
beauty of the Shire. He finds that he's become a hero like Merry and        
Pippin. Ironically enough, Frodo's deeds are overlooked. The folks          
of the Shire are more concerned with the events in their own small          
country than with far-off happenings in places they've never seen.          
They don't seem to understand the danger that would have faced them if      
Frodo's quest had failed.                                                   
  Frodo has not emerged from his trials unscathed, either physically        
or spiritually. The memory and the effect of the Ring stay with him.        
"It is gone forever," he says, "and now all is dark and empty." Like        
Gollum, he feels lost and empty without the Ring. Although Frodo has        
won peace for the land, he himself cannot enjoy it. He travels with         
Bilbo, Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel over the sea to the serenely          
beautiful Blessed Realm, leaving Sam to return home to his wife and         
child in the Shire.                                                         
  Some readers see this as a happy ending. Others feel sad that             
Frodo's selfless quest has ended unhappily for him. Which view do           
you agree with? Is this a pessimistic or an optimistic ending? Why          
do you feel that way?                                                       
                                                                            
TEST_AND_ANSWERS                                                            
                            A STEP BEYOND                                   
                           TEST AND ANSWERS                 (TLORTEST)      
-                                                                           
                                 TEST                                       
-                                                                           
  _____  1. The Lord of the Rings is                                        
-                                                                           
            A. Frodo                                                        
            B. Gandalf                                                      
            C. Sauron                                                       
-                                                                           
  _____  2. The Hobbit                                                      
-                                                                           
            A. was originally published as a children's book                
            B. is Tolkien's most important book                             
            C. is about the corrupting effect of power                      
-                                                                           
  _____  3. Smaug the dragon is a symbol of                                 
-                                                                           
            A. the destructive forces of nature                             
            B. greed                                                        
            C. the evils of technology                                      
-                                                                           
  _____  4. Which of the following are considered by some readers to        
            be references to Christianity in The Lord of the Rings?         
-                                                                           
            I. Lembas                                                       
           II. Gandalf's staff                                              
          III. The Blessed Realm                                            
-                                                                           
            A. I, II, and III                                               
            B. II and III only                                              
            C. I and III only                                               
-                                                                           
  _____  5. Gollum represents the                                           
-                                                                           
            A. potential for evil that Frodo must struggle against          
               within himself                                               
            B. dangers of showing mercy to evildoers                        
            C. power of the Ring to corrupt even those with the best        
               intentions                                                   
-                                                                           
  _____  6. The Ring represents the                                         
-                                                                           
            A. dangers of nuclear weapons                                   
            B. corrupting effect of absolute power                          
            C. power of the council of wizards                              
-                                                                           
  _____  7. Tom Bombadil and Treebeard                                      
-                                                                           
            A. add humor to The Lord of the Rings                           
            B. are representatives of the natural world                     
            C. are unwitting victims of evil                                
-                                                                           
  _____  8. Tolkien's only well-developed female character is               
-                                                                           
            A. Eowyn                                                        
            B. Galadriel                                                    
            C. Arwen                                                        
-                                                                           
  _____  9. The hobbits                                                     
-                                                                           
            I. are Tolkien's invention                                      
           II. represent the potential for greatness in ordinary            
               people                                                       
          III. represent disadvantaged minorities in today's society        
-                                                                           
            A. I and III only                                               
            B. II only                                                      
            C. I and II only                                                
-                                                                           
  _____ 10. Tolkien would most likely agree with which of these             
            statements about war?                                           
-                                                                           
            A. War is sometimes necessary to combat evil.                   
            B. War offers an opportunity for man to display his             
               heroism.                                                     
            C. Wars should never be fought, for any reason.                 
-                                                                           
  11. Would Tolkien agree with the phrase "Power corrupts, absolute         
power corrupts absolutely"? Give evidence to support your answer.           
-                                                                           
  12. Discuss how Tolkien uses the imagery of stars and shadow as           
symbols for good and evil.                                                  
-                                                                           
  13. Discuss two ways that Tolkien draws your attention to language        
in The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit.                                    
-                                                                           
                               ANSWERS                                      
-                                                                           
  1. C     2. A    3. B     4. C     5. A     6. B     7. B                 
  8. A     9. C   10. A                                                     
-                                                                           
  11. You could take either side of this question. If you say yes,          
discuss the corrupting influence of the Ring, using specific examples.      
Point to the fact that anybody, even Gandalf, will fall into the            
temptation to use it, and that once he uses it, he will become evil,        
like Sauron.                                                                
  You could argue from the opposite view, as well. Point to the fact        
that Frodo, Bilbo, Faramir, and others were able to resist the Ring.        
Those who fall prey to the Ring's power possess some character flaw,        
such as Boromir's pride and desire to rule others. Also point to the        
fact that there are different kinds of power. The elves possess the         
power to heal and the power to understand. It is only the power to          
dominate others that seems to corrupt.                                      
-                                                                           
  12. To answer this question, you must first show how Tolkien creates      
an association between stars and good, and between shadow and evil.         
For instance, Gandalf refers to Sauron as "the Shadow." Tolkien's           
elves, on the other hand, are closely associated with stars. You            
will find specific examples in the story section of this guide.             
  Next, you must show how the images of star and shadow serve as            
symbols for good and evil. For example, just as shadows can hide the        
stars, evil can hide all traces of good, leading some people to             
despair and believe that there is no good. But like the stars, good         
cannot be obliterated by evil and will endure no matter how                 
desperate things seem.                                                      
-                                                                           
  13. You have a variety of options here. You can illustrate the way        
Tolkien gives his characters different styles of speech. For                
example, you may want to discuss the speech of the trolls, the              
goblins, and Gollum in The Hobbit. You can also mention that sometimes      
language seems to have a power of its own. For example, Tom Bombadil        
uses language to give him power over things, and the language of            
Mordor brings a shadow over Rivendell when Gandalf speaks it there.         
Finally, Tolkien's use of invented languages draws attention to the         
variety of languages in the world and to the fact that his languages        
seem suited to the people who use them. You may want to point out           
the harshness of the language of Mordor and the grandeur of the             
language of the elves. Other ways that Tolkien draws your attention to      
language have been discussed throughout this guide.                         
                                                                            
TERM_PAPER_IDEAS                                                            
            TERM PAPER IDEAS AND OTHER TOPICS FOR WRITING   (TLORTERM)      
-                                                                           
  THE NOVELS                                                                
-                                                                           
  1. Explore the elements of the old traditions of mythology, legends,      
and folklore that Tolkien drew on. Then discuss his changes to make         
these traditions acceptable to a modern audience.                           
-                                                                           
  2. Around the time that Tolkien was writing The Lord of the Rings,        
he also wrote a lecture, "On Fairy-stories," which can be found             
under "Tree and Leaf" in The Tolkien Reader (New York: Ballantine           
Books, 1966). Discuss the ideas he presents in that lecture, and            
show how he applied them to The Lord of the Rings.                          
-                                                                           
  3. Discuss the ways in which The Hobbit seems designed for children.      
Compare The Hobbit to a children's classic, such as The Wind in the         
Willows, or to another book supposedly written for children but also        
enjoyed by adults, such as Alice in Wonderland.                             
-                                                                           
  4. Although Tolkien isn't the first writer of fantasy novels, he          
is often considered the "father of fantasy." Review the history of the      
fantasy novel, and examine Tolkien's contributions to the genre.            
-                                                                           
  5. Discuss similarities between The Hobbit and The Lord of the            
Rings. In what ways may The Lord of the Rings be said to be an              
expanded version of The Hobbit? In what ways is it more than just an        
elaborated version of The Hobbit's plot?                                    
-                                                                           
  THE AUTHOR                                                                
-                                                                           
  1. Discuss elements of Christianity that appear in the trilogy. Also      
discuss the belief of some readers that The Lord of the Rings is a          
Christian allegory. Tell whether or not you agree, and why.                 
-                                                                           
  2. While he was writing his books, Tolkien read them aloud to a           
group of friends called the Inklings. Two other authors of fantasy          
also belonged to the Inklings, C. S. Lewis and Charles Williams.            
Pick a fantasy novel by one of these authors and compare it with            
Tolkien's work. How are they similar, and how are they different?           
Point out where you think the authors may have influenced each others'      
works.                                                                      
-                                                                           
  3. In what ways did Tolkien's life influence his books?                   
-                                                                           
  CHARACTERS                                                                
-                                                                           
  1. Compare the characters of Frodo and Bilbo. Then discuss the            
significance of the differences between the two characters.                 
-                                                                           
  2. The different races in The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings            
each have their own "personalities." Choose three of these races,           
and briefly describe their characteristics. Be sure to include at           
least one strength and one weakness for each race. Then compare and         
contrast the three races.                                                   
-                                                                           
  3. Choose two of Tolkien's evil characters and show how they fit          
into his concept of evil. Next, discuss how Tolkien's ideas about evil      
can be applied to events in the world today.                                
-                                                                           
  4. Compare and contrast the characters of Frodo and Aragorn as            
they develop through the course of The Lord of the Rings.                   
-                                                                           
  5. It has been commented that Tolkien's books are written in such         
a way as to invite comparisons between characters. Choose two               
characters and show how Tolkien draws comparisons between them.             
Discuss the implications of these comparisons.                              
-                                                                           
  THEMES                                                                    
-                                                                           
  1. How does Tolkien develop his theme of the nature of heroism? Give      
examples.                                                                   
-                                                                           
  2. Discuss elements of elitism in Tolkien's books. Explain why            
some people criticize this elitism, while others defend it. Be sure to      
include examples of what some readers see as Tolkien's male,                
upper-class prejudices.                                                     
-                                                                           
  3. The Shire, Rivendell, and Lorien all represent various aspects of      
Tolkien's ideal society. Compare and contrast these different               
societies. Which would you prefer to live in? Why?                          
-                                                                           
  4. Discuss Tolkien's concept of the relationship between free will        
and destiny. Relate it to philosophical and theological debates             
about this question. Do you think man has free will?                        
-                                                                           
  5. Examine the relationship among loyalty to an individual,               
loyalty to a small group, and loyalty to all of mankind in Tolkien's        
books. Especially examine instances where loyalties conflict. How do        
the characters resolve their dilemmas? What implications can you            
draw about Tolkien's beliefs from these instances?                          
-                                                                           
  6. Make a list of the qualities associated with the forces of good        
in The Lord of the Rings and those associated with the forces of evil.      
Discuss any interesting patterns that emerge. For instance, do good         
and evil form a mirror image of each other? How do these qualities          
relate to Tolkien's themes?                                                 
-                                                                           
  7. Discuss the relationship between man and nature expressed in           
Tolkien's books. Mention characters that Tolkien uses to represent          
nature.                                                                     
-                                                                           
  8. Look at how Tolkien developed the Everyman theme in his books.         
Compare Tolkien's hobbits with the characters who appear to function        
as Everyman in other novels.                                                
                                                                            
MIDDLE_EARTH                                                                
                      CHRONOLOGY OF MIDDLE-EARTH            (TLORCHRO)      
-                                                                           
  This chronology of Middle-earth is taken from the more complete           
chronology in the appendices in The Return of the King and from             
information in The Silmarillion.                                            
-                                                                           
  FIRST AGE                                                                 
-                                                                           
  Eru, the One, creates the world with the help of the Valar, his           
servants, who dwell in the Blessed Realm. The elves, dwarves, and ents      
are created. Morgoth, one of the Valar who has turned evil, breeds a        
race of orcs.                                                               
  Many of the elves are brought by the Valar to the Blessed Realm.          
Morgoth steals three beautiful gems, the Silmarils, from the elves and      
carries them back to Middle-earth. A host of elves follow him to            
recover the jewels.                                                         
  At this time, men are created. The Dunedain, a noble race of men,         
join the fight against Morgoth. Earendil, who is half man, half elf,        
sails to the forbidden Blessed Realm. He asks help of the Valar, who        
defeat Morgoth.                                                             
-                                                                           
  SECOND AGE                                                                
-                                                                           
  0-40  The Dunedain are given the island of Numenor to settle.             
  1000  Sauron, Morgoth's servant, builds a stronghold in Mordor.           
  1500  Elves, deceived by Sauron, forge the Rings of Power.                
  1600  Sauron forges the One Ring.                                         
  1693-1700  War erupts between the elves and Sauron, In 1697, Elrond,      
a son of Earendil, founds Rivendell. In 1700, Sauron is defeated.           
  3262  Numenoreans capture Sauron, who has risen again.                    
  3262-3319  Sauron succeeds in corrupting the Numenoreans, who             
rebel against the Valar in 3319. Numenor is destroyed.                      
  3320  Elendil, who has led a few faithful Numenoreans to                  
Middle-earth, founds Arnor in the north and Gondor in the south.            
  3429-3441  Elves and men form an alliance against Sauron, who has         
reappeared. He is defeated in 3441. Elendil's son Isildur takes             
Sauron's Ring.                                                              
-                                                                           
  THIRD AGE                                                                 
-                                                                           
  2     Isildur is slain by orcs; Sauron's Ring is lost.                    
  1050  Hobbits first appear. Around this time, wizards also appear.        
  1409-1974  Arnor falls in a war against the ringwraiths. The              
        Dunedain of the North eventually become Rangers.                    
  1975  Ringwraiths are defeated in the North.                              
  1981  Dwarves flee Moria after a Balrog appears.                          
  1999  Dwarf kingdom under the Lonely Mountain is founded.                 
  2000  Ringwraiths begin war against Gondor.                               
  2050  Rule of stewards in Gondor begins.                                  
  2460  Sauron (the Necromancer) appears in Dol Guldor in Mirkwood.         
  2463  White Council is formed. Gollum finds the Ring. Orcs multiply       
        in the Misty Mountains.                                             
  2770  Smaug descends on the dwarf kingdom in the Lonely Mountain.         
  2890  Bilbo is born.                                                      
  2931  Aragorn is born.                                                    
  2941  Bilbo sets out on his adventure with the dwarves and finds          
        Sauron's Ring. The orcs are defeated in the Battle of the Five      
        Armies. Sauron is driven out of Dol Guldor by the White             
        Council.                                                            
  2942  Bilbo returns to the Shire. Sauron returns to Mordor.               
  2951  Aragorn and Arwen first meet.                                       
  2957-2980  Aragorn, incognito, joins first the men of Rohan, then         
        the men of Gondor, in their fight against Sauron's forces.          
  2968  Frodo is born.                                                      
  3001  Bilbo holds a farewell birthday party.                              
-                                                                           
  THE GREAT YEARS                                                           
-                                                                           
  3018  September: Frodo leaves Bag End, pursued by Black Riders.           
        October: Frodo arrives in Rivendell.                                
  3019  January: Gandalf dies in battle with the Balrog.                    
        February: Merry and Pippin are captured by orcs. Aragorn,           
          Legolas, and Gimli follow in an attempt to rescue them.           
          Frodo and Sam begin their long trek to Mordor.                    
        March 5: Gandalf breaks Saruman's staff.                            
        March 13: Frodo is captured by orcs just inside Mordor.             
        March 25: The Ring is destroyed.                                    
        May 1: Aragorn is crowned king of Gondor.                           
        November: Hobbits return to the Shire.                              
  3021  September: Frodo passes over the sea to the Blessed Realm.          
                                                                            
CRITICS                                                                     
                             THE CRITICS                    (TLORCRIT)      
-                                                                           
  THOUGHTS ON FRODO                                                         
  Today's reader of modern narrative, however medieval its spirit, may      
be reluctant to accept a truly medieval monster- a dragon or fiend-         
but he is accustomed to accepting internal conflict. Frodo the              
monster-queller might not be credible. But Frodo tortured by growing        
evil in his own nature... is believable and compelling.... In the           
final moment, standing at the Cracks of Doom, Frodo succumbs to the         
darkness within him. He puts the Ring on his finger, claimed by it          
even as he claims it.... For man always loses to the monster at             
last. Frodo is defeated as surely as Beowulf is....                         
  Although Frodo recovers from the battle, he can no longer be what he      
was.... The fairy-tale hero, inconspicuous and unassuming, has been         
made to suffer the bitterness and loss of the medieval epic hero. Like      
Beowulf, like Arthur, he loses the last battle and pays a heavy             
price for his struggle. Such an ending is dreadfully inappropriate....      
  And that, of course, is just Tolkien's point. It is not meant to          
be fair. We are beyond epic now, beyond romance and beyond the              
fairy-tale ending. In the real world things seldom turn out as we           
would like them to, and the little man is as subject to tragedy as the      
great one.                                                                  
          -Verlyn Flieger, "Frodo and Aragorn: The Concept of Hero in       
               'The Lord of the Ring,'" in Isaacs and Zimbardo, eds.,       
                             Tolkien: New Critical Perspectives, 1981       
-                                                                           
  ON TOLKIEN'S CHRISTIANITY                                                 
  The Lord of the Rings, then, although it presents no "God," no            
"Christ," and no "Christians," embodies much of Tolkien's "real             
religion" and is a profoundly Christian work. No "God" is required          
in this story.... Gandalf and Aragorn need not turn our thoughts to...      
Christ... but they persuade us that if we are to have hope in our           
lives and in our history it must be hope for the kind of power and          
authority revealed in Aragorn the king and on the basis of the kind of      
power revealed in Gandalf's "miracles" and in his rising from the           
dead. What Frodo does and undergoes speaks to us of what a man's            
responsibility, according to the Christian faith, must always be: to        
renounce the kind of power which would enslave others and ourselves         
and to submit to that power which frees us all.                             
       -Gunnar Urang, "Tolkien's Fantasy: The Phenomenology of Hope,"       
           in Mark R. Hillegas, ed., Shadows of the Imagination, 1969       
-                                                                           
  ON HOBBITS                                                                
  His Hobbit is both a bridge and a being more like Man than are the        
heroic, familiar, mock-human counterparts that appear in adventure          
stories. Moreover, the hobbit is... more of a human than if he were         
one, as petit-bourgeois as if he caught the 8:15 commuter train....         
  The rather jolly virtues of the Hobbits are raised to solemn              
magnificence when it is realized that these virtues endow their             
possessors with the power to face and subdue the terrible and               
soul-destroying opposition of Evil that besets them. It is the              
reluctant choice to face or not to face Evil... that raised Bilbo           
and more so his heir Frodo, above even great Beowulf.                       
                           -William Ready, The Tolkien Relation, 1968       
-                                                                           
  A DETRACTOR'S VIEW                                                        
  What we get is a simple confrontation- in more or less the                
traditional terms of British melodrama- of the Forces of Evil with the      
Forces of Good, the remote and alien villain with the plucky little         
homegrown hero.... For the most part such characterizations as Dr.          
Tolkien has been able to contrive are perfectly stereotyped: Frodo the      
good little Englishman, Samwise, his doglike servant, who talks             
lower class and respectful, and who never deserts his master. These         
characters... are involved in interminable adventures the poverty of        
invention displayed in which is... almost pathetic.                         
                           -Edmund Wilson, "Oo, Those Awful Orcs!" in       
                                           The Nation, April 14, 1956       
                                                                            
ADVISORY_BOARD                                                              
                            ADVISORY BOARD                  (TLORADVB)      
-                                                                           
  We wish to thank the following educators who helped us focus our          
Book Notes series to meet student needs and critiqued our                   
manuscripts to provide quality materials.                                   
-                                                                           
  Sandra Dunn, English Teacher                                              
  Hempstead High School, Hempstead, New York                                
-                                                                           
  Lawrence J. Epstein, Associate Professor of English                       
  Suffolk County Community College, Selden, New York                        
-                                                                           
  Leonard Gardner, Lecturer, English Department                             
  State University of New York at Stony Brook                               
-                                                                           
  Beverly A. Haley, Member, Advisory Committee                              
  National Council of Teachers of English Student Guide Series              
  Fort Morgan, Colorado                                                     
-                                                                           
  Elaine C. Johnson, English Teacher                                        
  Tamalpais Union High School District                                      
  Mill Valley, California                                                   
-                                                                           
  Marvin J. LaHood, Professor of English                                    
  State University of New York College at Buffalo                           
-                                                                           
  Robert Lecker, Associate Professor of English                             
  McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada                               
-                                                                           
  David E. Manly, Professor of Educational Studies                          
  State University of New York College at Geneseo                           
-                                                                           
  Bruce Miller, Associate Professor of Education                            
  State University of New York at Buffalo                                   
-                                                                           
  Frank O'Hare, Professor of English and Director of Writing                
  Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio                                     
-                                                                           
  Faith Z. Schullstrom, Member of Executive Committee                       
  National Council of Teachers of English                                   
  Director of Curriculum and Instruction                                    
  Guilderland Central School District, New York                             
-                                                                           
  Mattie C. Williams, Director, Bureau of Language Arts                     
  Chicago Public Schools, Chicago, Illinois                                 
-                                                                           
-                                                                           
                    THE END OF BARRON'S BOOK NOTES                          
        J. R. R. TOLKIEN'S THE HOBBIT & THE LORD OF THE RINGS               
                                                                            
                                                                            
                               BIBLIOGRAPHY                 (TLORBIBL)      
                                                                            
HOBBIT_&_LORD_OF_THE_RINGS                                                  
                           FURTHER READING                                  
-                                                                           
                            CRITICAL WORKS                                  
-                                                                           
  Carpenter, Humphrey. The Inklings. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1979.        
-                                                                           
  _____. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977. An           
authorized biography; contains valuable insights.                           
-                                                                           
  Carpenter, Humphrey, and Christopher Tolkien, eds. The Letters of J.      
R. R. Tolkien. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981.                              
-                                                                           
  Carter, Lin. Tolkien: A Look Behind "The Lord of the Rings." New          
York: Ballantine, 1969. Discusses ancient legends and epics that            
seem to have influenced Tolkien; also discusses the development of the      
fantasy genre.                                                              
-                                                                           
  Crabbe, Katharyn F. J. R. R. Tolkien. New York: Ungar, 1981. Easy         
reading.                                                                    
-                                                                           
  Foster, Robert. A Guide to Middle Earth. New York: Ballantine, 1975.      
Handy guide to the people and places of Middle-earth.                       
-                                                                           
  Grotta-Kurska, Daniel. J. R. R. Tolkien: Architect of Middle              
Earth. New York: Warner, 1976. Biography.                                   
-                                                                           
  Helms, Randel. Tolkien's World. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1974.           
-                                                                           
  Hillegas, Mark R., ed. Shadows of the Imagination: The Fantasies          
of C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien, and Charles Williams. Carbondale:         
Southern Illinois University Press, 1969.                                   
-                                                                           
  Isaacs, Neil D., and Rose A. Zimbardo, eds. Tolkien and the Critics:      
Essays on J. R. R. Tolkien's "The Lord of the Rings." Notre Dame:           
University of Notre Dame Press, 1968.                                       
-                                                                           
  _____. Tolkien: New Critical Perspectives. Lexington: University          
Press of Kentucky, 1981. Collection of essays. "Frodo and Aragorn: The      
Concept of Hero" and "Tolkien and the Rhetoric of Childhood" are            
exceptionally good.                                                         
-                                                                           
  Kocher, Paul H. Master of Middle Earth: The Fiction of J. R. R.           
Tolkien. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1972. Critical discussion of             
Tolkien's works, including his lesser-known poetry and stories.             
-                                                                           
  Noel, Ruth S. The Mythology of Middle-earth. Boston: Houghton             
Mifflin, 1977. Compares elements of Tolkien's novels with various           
legends and myths.                                                          
-                                                                           
  Ready, William. The Tolkien Relation. New York: Warner, 1968.             
Interesting insights.                                                       
-                                                                           
  Shippey, T. A. The Road to Middle Earth. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,        
1983. Thoughtful discussion of Tolkien's fiction by a fellow                
philologist.                                                                
-                                                                           
  Urang, Gunnar. Shadows of Heaven: Religion and Fantasy in the             
Writings of C. S. Lewis, Charles Williams, and J. R. R. Tolkien. New        
York: Pilgrim, 1971.                                                        
-                                                                           
  West, Richard C. Tolkien Criticism: An Annotated Checklist. Rev. ed.      
Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1981.                              
-                                                                           
                    AUTHOR'S SELECTED OTHER WORKS                           
-                                                                           
  Tolkien wrote very little fiction besides The Hobbit and The Lord of      
the Rings. This list contains his better-known stories and poetry,          
as well as relevant nonfiction. You'll find a complete listing of           
all his fiction and nonfiction in the back of Humphrey Carpenter's          
Tolkien: A Biography.                                                       
-                                                                           
  FICTION                                                                   
-                                                                           
  1947     "Leaf by Niggle"                                                 
  1949     "Farmer Giles of Ham"                                            
  1967     "Smith of Wooten Major"                                          
  1977     The Silmarillion                                                 
-                                                                           
  POETRY                                                                    
-                                                                           
  1962     "The Adventures of Tom Bombadil"                                 
-                                                                           
  NONFICTION                                                                
-                                                                           
  1936     "Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics" (essay)                  
  1947     "On Fairy-stories" (essay)                                       
  1953     "The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth Beorhthelm's Son" (essay)          
  1975     Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, and Sir Orfeo (a         
           translation of three medieval poems)                             
-                                                                           
-                                                                           
         THE END OF THE BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR BARRON'S BOOK NOTES                
        J. R. R. TOLKIEN'S THE HOBBIT & THE LORD OF THE RINGS               
                                                                            
                                      1876                                  
                                                                            
                                  MARK TWAIN'S                              
                                   TOM SAWYER                               
                                                                            
                               by Eric F. Oatman                            
                           Editor, Scholastic Update                        
                                Scholastic Inc.                             
                                                                            
                               SERIES COORDINATOR                           
                          Murray Bromberg, Principal,                       
                Wang High School of Queens, Holliswood, New York            
      Past President, High School Principals Association of New York City   
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
            (C) Copyright 1985 by Barron's Educational Series, Inc.         
                                                                            
   Electronically Enhanced Text (C) Copyright 1993, World Library, Inc.     
                                                                            
---------------------------------------------------------
Electronically Enhanced Text (C) Copyright 1991 - 1994 World Library, Inc.
